_
The Massachusetts Institute of
Technology began with a promise
A promise that with a
devotion to technology,
through vigorous study of math and science,
we can engineer a better tomorrow,
we can make a better world.
In this story, we ask a simple
question, Have we kept our promise?
MIT was founded in 1861, but the institute
as we know it today, was born in 1941,
December 7th, 1941. No matter how long
it may take us to overcome this premeditated
invasion, the American people in their
righteous mic will win through to absolute.
Once news of the attack on Pearl Harbor
reached the student body campus was in and
uproar, students prepared
to drop out in droves,
ready to enlist in military service.
Worried about the mass exodus
of students from campus.
President Compton urged students
to finish their degrees.
If students were desperate to answer
the call to arms, then MIT would front line.
MIT was well positioned to support the
war effort having recently solved everything
there is to know about boats from
Pearl Harbor to the end of the war,
United States would build
nearly 6,000 ships.
But building the most dominant nav force
the world had ever seen was simply not
enough. President Roosevelt had declared
total war and any hope that the
United States had of winning relied
on mobilizing industrial potential of the
nation.
The US military needed MIT to develop
fundamentally new technology and the
institute administrators recognized as
opportunity, namely President Compton and
his colleague Boniva Bush, who
is Dean of Engineering at the time.
Vannevar Bush was a brilliant American
engineer, born of a long line of
Massachusetts boatman in 1915, having
already invented a novel surveyor tool.
Bush enrolled as a grad student at MIT
and during the PhD in electrical engineering
in only nine months.
He began teaching at MIT in 1919 and
extended his track record of innovation.
First Bush developed Rectifier Tube,
which radically simplified home radio and
started a company called
Raytheon, The Market.
His device, one of his proudest inventions,
was an analog computer for solving
higher order differential equations.
Bush was quoted saying that the
computer represented an ideal,
the ability to think straight
in the midst of complexity.
During
World War ii, the Defense Department
would run Bush's computer 24 hours a day.
Bush
Would go on to lead long and esteemed
life advocating federal supportive scientific
research and technological advancement.
Ultimately leading to the creation
of the National Science Foundation.
Bush's are sent for from academia, began
with the immense opportunity that World
War II provided. He moved his career
from MIT to the White House as Chief Science
advisor to President Roosevelt, managing
all defense contracts and spearheading the
creation of the National
Defense Research Committee.
President Compton, a founding
member of the ndrc,
continued to serve as MIT president.
Aligning the institute with the Warrior
Compton was an impressive man as well,
installed as president of the Institute.
At the dawn of the Great Depression,
he faced an anti-scientific culture and a
financially crippled mit, an idealist.
He overhauled MIT's engineering
curriculum and infused the sense Vigo,
it still known for today.
He sought an education system in science
and engineering that could propel the
nation forward.
And he later shaped other colleges in
the institute's image as the head of multiple
accreditation boards. Once
World War II broke out,
he was tasked with the most precious
need of the US defense strategy rubber.
With Southeast Asia, our prime rubber
supplier now cut off from the allies the US
scrambled for new sources
of the strategic material.
President Roosevelt appointed President
Compton and other scientific leaders to
quickly develop a strategy
for synthetic production.
It was the first test in just one month.
The taskforce built and connected
51 factories across the country.
The success solidified MIT as an
important gear in the warm machine.
The war effort consumed MIT
and MIT consumed the war.
It's fair to say that to enroll at MIT
was to enlist in the technological branch of
the US Armed Forces.
MIT's RAD lab built the first
deployable radar machines.
Professor
Charles Stark Draper's instrumentation
lab developed inertial navigation systems
critical to ships, tanks, planes,
and virtually everything that move.
Professor Edgerton pioneered high speed
photography critical for Connaissance and
ultimately making D-Day possible.
The war was won in Europe.
Electricity was no longer bashing and
Killian Quartz lights could come back on.
Took a memory. At VE day, the institute
celebrated in the only way it knew how by
hosting a science fair showing off.
All the technology developed
during those few short years,
but there was still one more enemy,
and MIT had one more lap to fight it.
With all of the projects
successfully completed,
institute students and faculty
flock to Los Alamos.
In an effort to bear the, the
RAD Lab completely shut down.
Emptying itself flows.
Alamos, every department sent its best
electrical engineers, physicists, chemists,
and even photographers came together for
their ultimate creation, pure destruction.
He knew the world would not be the same.
Few people laughed, few people cried.
Most people were silent.
I remembered the line
from the Indu scripture.
The Bible, Adi this knew, was trying
to persuade the prince that he should do his
duty and to impress him, takes
on his multi-armed form and says,
Now I am become deaf.
The destroyer of worlds.
I suppose we all thought
that one way or another.
Hello, I'm John Fitch,
MIT Science Reporter.
We're at the home of Dr. Vannevar
Bush in Belmont, Massachusetts.
He shared the enormous responsibility
for the development and use of our most
fearsome weapon, the atomic bomb.
Let's meet Dr. Bush.
Well, of course my first reaction was
one of great relief that the program had been
successful and the bomb
had gone off on a schedule.
Well, now when you go look back
from a vantage point of 18 years, uh,
do you have any regrets about it?
No. Of course, President Truman
made the decision to use the bomb,
but I thought then, and I
think now that he was right
After successfully conquering
the planet in the second World War.
Life at MIT was peaceful, almost bucolic
word spread of MIT's decisive role in the
war and its prestige balloon
as its acceptance rate rank.
A focus on an enhanced student life emerged
with ample funding for student groups,
recreation, and additional dorms.
The institute would be unrecognizable
to a student from just 10 years prior.
MIT had become a popular
kid with powerful friends.
This was made possible by MIT's now permanent
wartime friends, the d o d, the cia,
and countless private
military contractors.
Butcher own Athia was chief amongst them.
Former GIS returned to a greatly expanded
MIT living in highly experimental west
campus housing, replete with solar panels
and other cutting edge innovations.
With the Lewis report, the undergraduate
curriculum was overhauled.
Once again. The report, which
was more of a proclamation,
broke up the institute
into distinct schools.
Science, engineering, architecture planning,
and has coursework and humanities and
social sciences was instituted as a
requirement for all undergraduates with no
exceptions. The report
also exposed an epidemic.
Of course, Bibles compilations of
past exams and problem sets with answers
included. A radical demographic
shift was also underway.
Over the course of the decade, the undergraduate
population of women grew by 50
students.
About 100 co-eds attend MIT and participate
in all aspects of student affairs.
The girls have their own social rooms
in the main school building inside this door.
It's strictly no men allowed Hear the
co-eds congregate between classes and relax
from the pressure of class
work among other things.
This is the girls' Communication Center.
In typical feminine fashion, the girls
take time out to gossip about clothes and
dates, exchange news, and congratulate
or sympathize with one another about their
grades. MIT co-eds are gifted musically
too and relax in this enjoyable manner.
After finishing with gossiping and other
talk, when studying in the horizontal,
one must be prepared to
accept this consequence.
Here, the girls study in complete silence
and the signs of intense concentration
are evident well, most
of the time anyway.
After all, the studious beaver
is also the social beaver.
And what is more natural than planning
and daydreaming about that new evening gown.
In 1955, the institute established the
Office of Minority Education to promote
inclusion for the growing number
of Irish and Italian students.
MIT's non-white population quickly grew.
This family from the Philippines is a
reminder that MIT has the most cosmopolitan
student body of any college or university
in the United States with nearly every
country in the world represented.
The core of MIT's success is its power
to vitalize its students hidden reserve of
energy and imagination.
This the classroom cannot do alone
for the social life of the student is the
catalyst. MIT provides
all the ingredients needed.
Our social beaver has rare extracurricular
opportunities and does indeed use them
well.
Before our story begins, let
setting for Boston,
we see a of technology.
MIT is best known for the scientists
and engineers who have studied there,
but much of MIT's campus houses,
laboratories, and research project,
which provides a stimulating
practice for faculty and students.
On the edge of the campus is the digital
Computer laboratory home of Project
Whirlwind.
In the late 1950s, MIT was at
the forefront of digital computing.
Claude Shannon was pioneering information
theory introducing binary digits or bits
to encode information.
His colleague, Perry Crawford helped
develop whirlwind a state-of-the-art digital
computer that became
the standard for all.
That followed
The Amatic element where the Arithmetics
performed consists of 16 racks.
Each rack handles one of the
16 binary digits rising of Word.
Harry and Claw developed their work under
the mentorship of a shared advisor for
Neva Bush. Other professors were also
hard at work, bolstering MIT's reputation.
Professors Marvin Minsky and John McCarthy
founded a groundbreaking computer
science lab, and in the process coined
a term that would change the world.
Artificial intelligence.
Now, what are they doing?
Showing the computer the
alphabet for the first time?
Yes.
In just the same way the teacher
did with a child letter.
The longer the line, the
sure the computer is of its
Answer's indicated that
bottom bar 80% sure.
Pretty good.
Now, do you call that learning?
Well, I know that if my wife and I
saw our kids going through that process,
we'd call it learning.
So machines really can learn.
With the Cold War simulating
in the background,
MIT expanded it's pursuit of science
and engineering for a better world.
Doc Draper's lab continued producing
guidance systems for the military
and the Lincoln Laboratories were founded
to strengthen the link between MIT and
the Department of Defense. Recruiting
pipelines were engineered from the institute
to the cia, d o d and private
military contractors,
ensuring government access to
MIT's most valuable resource.
Towards the end of the fifties, a satellite
Lincoln Labs detected something it had
never detected before, something
no one had ever detected before.
Medium range
Me
Military buildup on the island of
Among the stars, like the
Purpose of these bases can be none
other Then to provide a nuclear strike
capability against the Western Hemisphere,
we choose to go to the moon in this
decay and do the other thing
To boldly go When no man has gone before,
Fill my heart with and let sing
The apparently official President Kennedy
Died at one.
Shall Hannah overcome.
Stop sweet talking.
Tell him how.
And let's to clean his house up.
He shouldn't have a house
should catch on fire.
Burned
Fill
My heart with song.
Let me sing Forever
In love
In a nation's pledge.
Now been fulfilled.
The lunar age has begun.
You, man.
On the moon. Oh boy.
Boy. We're gonna be busy for
a minute while they say something.
I'm speechless.
Hi. Uh, could I have
the um, noodle salad?
Yes. With, uh, tofu as the protein?
Yeah. And, uh, soy drizzle
as the dressing.
Okay. Anything else?
Uh, that's all.
Okay, thank you.
No problem.
If you read through the campus newspaper
from all the years before World War ii,
you would think Yeah, an engineer
definitely wrote this.
It is the most dry end dispassionate
newspaper I've ever read.
It's barely more than a list of academic
deadlines and updates about how poorly the
athletic teams are doing.
Uh, pretty boring stuff.
Uh, but Pearl Harbor changes all that.
You see, when there is a
national directive in place,
when resources and efforts
are consolidated,
the institute really becomes impassioned.
It finds its purpose, and in the 1960s,
that directive was the space rich.
5 4 3, 2, 1 0.
All engine runs.
Today's big picture will reveal the dramatic
suspenseful story of how the army,
when the Prestiges of the United States
throughout the world had been shaken by
events beyond its control, stirred the
hearts and emotions of the American people
with an epic display of scientific
and technical teamwork.
When NASA began operations on October
1st, 1958, it already had connections to mit.
MIT president, Dr. James Killian, was
serving a special assistant for science and
technology to President Eisenhower.
It was Dr. Killian who recommended
that the National Advisory Committee for
Aeronautics be transformed to the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration.
Several other notable figures from the
early years of NASA were MIT faculty and
alumni. Professor Jerome c Hunsaker
served as chairman of NACA in the fifties,
Professor Rayman l Biling Hoff was
NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced
Research and Technology. Professor Robert
Siemens served as deputy administrator.
John McCarthy was the chief engineer
of the Space Systems Division at North
American Aviation, the NASA contractor
that built the Apollo commanded service
modules. Joseph g Gavin was president
of the Grumman Corporation and oversaw
construction of Apollo's Luna Module.
Many of the Apollo era astronauts
were also MIT alumni.
Once formed, NASA began to innovate
at a pace that has never been seen by any
institution since.
Project Mercury kicked off in the first
days of NASA to probe the most fundamental
questions associated with space travel.
Its mission was to orbit a man spacecraft
around Earth to investigate how a human
body functions in space, and to safely
return an astronaut and spacecraft to
ground.
After Alan, she became the second man
and first American to orbit the earth and
return safely. President Kennedy announced
the directive of landing a man on the
moon. 10 weeks later, the first major
contract of the Apollo program was awarded to
NASA's older brother mit.
The contract was for the navigation
and guidance system,
the autopilot that would get the
astronauts from Earth to Luna Orbit.
The contract was awarded to the MIT
Instrumentation Lab led by Dr. Draper.
Hello, I'm John Fitch, MIT Science.
Before today, we're at the
MIT Instrumentation Laboratory,
which has been given design responsibility
for this guidance and navigation system,
which will direct our Apollo spacecraft
ons way to the Bulls facts.
At one time, direction of the rising
sun rapid winding riverbed with all the fan
needed is restless search for new land.
Today we speak of traversing a billion
miles of empty space where there is no
north, no south, no rising, north
setting sun, not even any up or down.
It's an extremely complicated
pass requiring many,
many measurements and
billions of calculation.
The guidance system operating at a 12
microsecond clock speed performed flawlessly
through nine flights to the moon.
Astronaut David, a Scott called
it a tremendous machine,
so reliable that they
never needed the backups.
The space age Ushered in many of the
technologies that have become ubiquitous of
the most notable was
satellite television.
In 1962, Lincoln Laboratories transmitted
television via satellite.
For the first time using NASA's
Echo one balloon satellites,
the picture transmitted 2,700
miles across the country.
Was short and simple, just three letters.
The space race was cool, but it's the
social change at MIT that I find truly
remarkable. In 1964, we got McCormick
McCall, the first and only campus dorm built
for women. The population of female
undergrads grew to over 150 because
You know, they're older people.
You know, you get yeah, your freshman
year and you can have the attitude of
enjoying what you're learning.
Somewhat , right?
Especially since it just, it
makes such a better atmosphere.
I came up here and visited last year
and I met lots of nice people and I went to
classes and things, and it seemed
like a really great place.
Social life is nothing to snub and
the 20 to one ratio, you can't lose.
I have not money.
1964 is also when Shirley and Jackson
arrives on campus at the time.
She's won of fewer than 20 black students
at MIT in 1968 when she and fellow
student Jennifer Rudd graduate, they're
the first black women to earn their
undergraduate degrees in mit.
Jackson goes on to become the first black
woman to earn a doctorate in mit and the
second black woman in the United
States to earn a doctorate in physics.
1968 is also the founding year of the
Black students union with Jackson leading it
in its first year.
The MIT Black Student Union
was formed last spring to,
to bring together black students to see
what they had in their minds and to see
what we could do. We presented our proposals
this fall to the administration, uh,
about, uh, getting more
black students at mit.
Hopefully, we'll have a hundred
freshmen in the fall,
although this may be kind
of a naive, uh, estimate.
It might be an overestimation,
but we are trying,
and now we're in the process
of recruiting black students
After McCormick call.
There are a number of
other changes to campus.
The green building is completed in 1964.
E 53 and E 55 followed
shortly thereafter.
And in 1965, the student center opened.
You can imagine how much construction
must have been going on at that time.
Many of MIT's characteristic institutions
were born in this era.
The interface edge program began in 1969,
the same year that Margaret mc launched
the undergraduate research
opportunities program.
In 1968, MIT and Wellesley began
the cross registration program pass.
Fail grading was also implemented
for students first two semesters.
Uh, the school here is
Sort of a machine where you go in and
they pound math and science into your head
about six or seven hours a day.
And when you get out of here,
you can do any engineering problem.
Of course, there don't seem to be
very concerned with how much emotion or
creativity or individuality
that you have left.
They're not, There's no set
pattern of destroying this.
It just seems that in learning so much
that is cold and unemotional so quickly,
you don't have time to develop the emotional
responses that are usually associated
with, let's say, a more
liberal education.
People. People plan their
time very carefully.
They, they budget their
time for their classes.
They budget their time
even for their dates.
You know, it's, it's, it's as if their,
their whole social life were compartmentalized
into this five or six hours on
Saturday night, because that's
the time they have to spend on it.
Could you lower those signs, please?
I have some very sad news for all of you.
And that is that Martin Luther King was
shot and was killed tonight in Memphis.
In April, 1968, the MIT community mourned
the passing of Reverend Dr. Martin Luther
King Jr. Classes were canceled.
Commemorative art exhibits were
put on display around campus,
and students took time
to reflect on their place.
In a changing nation.
The everyone's birthday would soon
become a designated institute holiday.
Years before it was made, a federal holiday
celebrated annually with the March a
guest speaker and other
memorial activities.
Therefore, and beyond this, I think the
students of today are the sensitive edge of
society that is pressing against the
dehumanizing elements of technocracy.
Human personality and values have
been in a losing war with the impersonal
operation of a rapidly
evolving complex society.
We are a nation incomparable
in wealth and power,
but impoverished spiritually
and psychologically.
Our activities generate, uh, bewildering
array of material goods and no
satisfactions.
Our machines have grown so large
and we have become so small.
We no longer asked for
what purpose they are made.
I must confess that, uh, that dream that
I had that day has a minute points turned
into a nightmare.
Now, I'm not one to lose hope.
I keep on hoping, uh, I still
have faith in the future,
but I've had to analyze many
things over the last few years.
And I would say over the last few months,
I've gone through a lot of soul such in
agonizing moments, and I've come
to see that, uh, we have, uh,
many more difficult days ahead.
And some of the old optimism
was a little superficial,
and now it must be tempered
with a solid realism.
And I think the realistic fact is that
we still have a long, long way to go,
and that we are involved
in a war on Asian soil, uh,
which if not checked and stunt and
paused in the very soul of our nation.
The sixties are marked by
this grave introspection.
We were still high from World War ii.
We had defeated evil.
We had conquered the world, frankly,
with nothing but the power of our minds and
hands and a shitload of money.
But in the sixties, it was puzzling
as America's engineers to wake up to the
consequences of our deeds.
Tonight, report from Vietnam
by Walter Crown Kite.
How could the Vietnamese communists have
mounted this offensive with such complete
surprise? Well, let's take a look
On the other side of the globe.
The bloodshed Vietnam
showed no sign of ending.
In January, 1968, the via con blew
back at US forces with the nude strength
destroying any illusions of an imminent
American victory across the United States.
Students hearts were set on fire.
In the wake of the Ted Offensive, a special
visitor came to MIT at the behest of an
undergrad named Michael Albert.
19 year old Army Desert, Michael O'Connor
took refuge in the student centers,
Las de Puerto Rico,
Where the day show over
Linguistics professor, no Chomsky, a
mentor of this burgeoning student movement
warned Albert and others of the severe
consequence to hosting a desert.
The military police were
in the pursuit of O'Connor,
but the students wanted
to make a statement.
Few dozen students camped
out on the with O'Connor,
while the rest of campus
was mostly disinteresting,
He
Don't want to beat. As each day went by,
Michael Albert and company
spread awareness.
Hundreds of students tripled
into las as the week progressed,
putting rock concerts and press conferences,
all in support of the desert classes
had to be canceled.
They gathered at all hours of the day
to support O'Connor field reporters and fend
off disruptors,
Give up, give mad of violent civilization
In
Civilization, where I
Eight days in federal agents arrested
Michael O'Connor while everyone would still,
The
Classes resumed and students
hunger for additional action.
Yeah, I got the constitution on the run.
Michael Albert started his career at
MIT as a physics major arriving on campus
before the countercultural
event took over.
I came back to mit and I looked
around, and it was quite a contrast.
I saw gray walls as far as you could see.
I saw faculty who would come in
and, and write textbooks on the wall.
I saw an utter lack, a complete
absence of emotion.
And then I began to understand why.
It's because this place means
to produce a certain product.
And the product is a very, a very well
trained, a very capable, a very brilliant,
in many cases, scientist or engineer
who will solve any problem, any problem,
so long as it's of some
interest and so long.
Inflamed by the Vietnam War,
I would end a few others,
dedicated their undergraduate careers
to browsing the notoriously apathetic student
body. After helping the deserter, he joined
Students for Democratic Society or sds,
a national student movement dedicated
to ending the war effort.
The students were plenty
riled up at this point,
but you also had movement on the
faculty side, like with Noam Chomsky,
who finally enough was originally hired
by MIT to do research for the Cold War.
Noam Chomsky started at MIT 15 years
before Michael Albert as he wrapped up his
fellowship in linguistics at Harvard.
He knew that a faculty position was
out of the question in Chomsky's words,
you could cut the antisemitism
with a knife.
So he ventured a few blocks south to
MIT's research laboratory of electronics.
He heard that it's leader, Drew
Weisner was rather liberal.
We a quickly offer Chomsky
research position.
His managers assigned him to a DOD funded
project to automatically translate Soviet
documents to English through
digital computing.
What followed was a rapid sent through
the institute as he revolutionized
theoretical linguistics and built
MIT's new linguistics department.
How the brain,
It became a known antiwar activist
shortly after the conflict in Vietnam was
escalated by JFK
On the faculty at mit.
And I've been, uh, getting more and more
heavily involved in antiwar activities for
the last few years.
Uh, beginning with, uh,
the writing articles and
making speeches and, uh,
speaking to congressmen
and that sort of thing,
and gradually getting involved
more and more directly in, uh,
resistance activities of various sorts.
Uh, usually Mr. Chomsky writes
nonpolitical books, for instance,
syntactic structures in 1957,
Cartesian Linguistics in 1966.
He is a highly esteemed, a student of
modern language and linguistics who teaches
nowadays at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology.
You say the war is simply an obscenity,
a depraved act by and miserable men,
Including all of us, including myself,
including every, That's the next sense.
This is the sense of theological
observation, isn't it?
No, I don't
Think so. Because if somebody points
out, if everybody's guilty of everything,
then nobody's guilty of anything.
No,
I, no, I don't, I don't believe that.
See, I think that, I think the point
that I'm trying to make and I think ought to
be made seems to me,
uh, a very, in a sense,
terrifying aspect of our society is the
equanimity and the detachment with which
sane, reasonable, sensible people.
Mm-hmm.
can't observe that event.
I think occasional Hitler or lame or other,
that crops up these people would not be
able to operate. Were it not for
the, this apathy and equanimity.
And therefore, I think
that it's in some sense,
the sane and reasonable
tolerant people who should,
who share a very serious burden of guilt.
Why do they, why do these agricultural
interests authorize us to intervene in South
Vietnam?
They did. If you consider this, this
is because we didn't intervene on this is a
critical dimension. No, I
say that in the Philippines.
It was a critical look.
The world is a complex place.
I'm aware there are certain
interests that were involved.
MIT is a complex, Well, there were certain
interests that were involved in, sorry.
As America continued to wage war, Chomsky
spoke around the country and taught
undergraduate courses on the US
Empire, many of which were attended by
Michael Albert and other
future student articles.
He acknowledged the irony of holding
such strong anti-war views as a professor at
mit, but he understood the power
that its faculty and students had.
The same can be said, I think, for the
club of academic intellectuals who under the
liberal administrations of the 1960s
designed and implemented the Vietnam War.
And the, uh, other similar,
those smaller actions.
This particular community is a very relevant
one to consider at a place like mit
because of course you're all free
to enter, enter this community.
In fact, you're invited
and encouraged to enter it.
Uh, the community of technical intelligencia and
weapons designers and counterinsurgency,
experts and pragmatic planners of
an American empire is one that you have a
great deal of inducement
to, uh, become associated
With. Leonardo DaVinci, who visualized
man's flight 500 years ago,
experienced the same fever when he wrote.
But once you have tasted flight,
you will walk the earth with your eyes,
turn skyward, for there you have
been and there you long to return.
This is John Fitch, MIT Science Reporter.
A semester passed
since Connor's arrest, an anger fomented.
I would follow a little pathway on
something like a TV screen in front of me.
That, that, uh, would direct
me, right, left, or center.
I could pull the commit switch on
my stick and the computer took over, uh,
computer, figured out the ballistics,
the air speed, the, the slant range,
and dropped the bombs when we
got to the appropriate point.
So it was very much of a,
a technical expertise thing.
Never could see the people,
you know, you never could see.
Occasionally you saw the houses when
you were bombing around a village or bombing
in a village. Uh, you know,
you never heard the explosion.
You never, uh, saw any
blood or any screams.
It was very clean.
Students distrust towards MIT
as an organ of the state only grew,
especially as they uncover the
institute's wartime projects.
They revealed the Dock Draper iLabs creation
of an attack helicopter stabilizer,
which allowed for sustained machine
gunfire while hovering in place.
When we broke onto the airport where those
helicopters were and photographed them,
came back with the photographs, we were
able to prove what we said all along,
which was that the helicopters were gun
ships and that the stabilization process
was to be able to shoot the peasants
and the fields in Vietnam more accurately.
Uh, I predict that inertial principles
will be used in all the guidance systems of
the future. Many improvements will occur,
but the inertial principles will be
always with us.
And I can't presume to predict
what the future is gonna hold,
but I'm sure it's going to be
different from anything we imagine.
I'm sure it's also going
to be much more extensive,
and we're gonna do many more tricks than
anybody today imagines that we can do.
And how we do this, I don't know, but
the human race is certainly gonna go out into
the stars. I thank you very much
For multiple independently
targetable reentry.
Vehicle was also uncovered.
It allowed a single ballistic missile
to deploy multiple nuclear war heads to many
different targets, a boon for any nation
hoping to land a devastating first strike.
On March 4th, 1969, students and faculty
canceled all classes in research so that
the institute could reflect
on its role in the war machine.
The action was known as
scientists strike for peace.
Chomsky read his famous, the responsibility
of intellectuals and the student
radicals took charge.
The Union of Concerned Scientists was
also formed in their founding document.
They warned the Stone Age may return
on the gleaming wings of science and what
might now shower in measurable material
blessings upon mankind may even bring about
its total destruction be where
I say time may be short.
Elections for the undergraduate association
or UA were held shortly after the
action founded in 1893.
The role of the UA has always been
what the President makes of it.
Sometimes its presence was barely felt,
and other times Michael Albert was in
charge. Albert ran for UA president on
a sweeping platform, first and foremost,
an end to all war research at mit.
Additionally, an acceptance of
the Black suit union's demands,
namely a vast increase in black undergraduate
admission and scholarships.
He also promised a committee to alleviate
the housing crisis in Cambridge,
which he blamed on MIT and Harvard
In army of students put up
posters, handed out flyers,
and campaigned across the dorms.
After eight runoffs, Albert won as a
right RightIn candidate and has election
achieved the highest voter
turnout in UA history.
End it right now.
If after all of this time and all of
this sacrifice and all of this support,
there is still no end in sight.
Then I say the time has come for the
American people to turn to new leadership,
not tied to the policies
and mistakes of the past.
I pledge to you, we shall have an
honorable end to the war in Vietnam
This time. Vote like your
whole world depended on it.
The fall semester of 1969 radicalized
even more students Nixon and promised to end
the conflict upon his election.
But there was no end to the war in sight.
In October, over a hundred thousand
people gathered in the Boston Commons to
protest the Vietnam War.
1000 MIT students attended.
What
Student's perception of
MIT was at an all time low?
The undergraduate student newspaper,
The Old Mole set a grim tone.
MIT isn't a center for scientific
and social research to serve humanity.
It's a part of the US war machine.
MIT's purpose is to provide
research, consulting services,
and train personnel for the US government
and the major corporations,
research services and personnel, which
enable them to maintain their control over
the people of the world.
The November action coalitions campaign
was directed against MIT as an institution
against its central purpose.
The peak of unrest came in November.
The November actions were a weeklong
series of sit-ins, pickets and protests.
Protesters no longer wanted to pause,
were related research, but to disrupt it,
The brother, you got
all wrong about the war.
Brother. The North Vietnamese tropes
didn't enter South Vietnam and didn't start
Taking apart the war until
They were bombed.
Look, we're getting, telling
me something about Vietnam.
All the relevancies, North
Vietnam was bombed, right?
Right. Wasn't a lot of
countries were bombed.
Of course, a lot countries were bombed.
You think it's right? Think it's right.
All, all those mothers and children
getting a bombed think it's right.
What happened Way, What
happened in way that's
Protecting?
That's the kind what
Happened. Look at, look at facts all.
But what happened when the National
Liberation Front, your heroes liberated.
Liberated the city of way.
Okay. Yeah.
What? I don't need sign.
I don't need a sign.
You don't need it. What happened in
the city of way when they liberated it,
they literally dug mass execution
grave and executed people, right?
Yes. I know if I'm back.
Cause I was there doing
a 10 offensive friend.
Yes.
Everybody here reminds
They staged a sit-in, in MIT's
Center for International Studies,
a CIA funded department whose lead
researchers helped develop torture and
assassination programs in Vietnam.
Your
Attention,
I must that a restraining order issued
by the Superior Court and the of course of
violence on the campus in any professionals,
buildings or facilities,
or in any corridor, stairways and entrances
there too or elsewhere on the Silk
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
premises in such manner as to disrupt or
interfere with normal functions conducted
by the set Massachusetts Institute of
Technology in such place, or to block
or hinder access to or egress from any of
such properties by set Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, faculty,
administrators, students, employees.
I think I have a responsibility
to see what happens.
Please leave this area.
Please leave this area now.
Please better stay the the way
Later. Over 300 students blocked off
the infinite corridor preventing students,
professors, and members of
the administration from working
Get the fuck out.
Obstructed from his office.
Provost Jerome Wener confronted the
articles and argued with them for hours.
MIT President Howard Johnson
was nowhere to be found
when MIT president Howard Johnson
had an atypical background.
He served in an administrative role in
World War II and assisted in the rebuilding
of France. Johnson came home to study
economics at the University of Chicago where
he later became a lecturer.
He went on to become a professor at MIT's
Sloan School of Management and became its
dean in 1959.
After seven years as Dean, he was
appointed the 12th president of mit.
He always smiled when
students called him Hoja.
George Kakis was about to begin his sophomore
year at MIT when his mother sent a
letter to President Howard Johnson.
The terms of his parents' divorce left
him without the funds to continue attending
mit. His father was a career soldier,
and George planned to follow in his
footsteps. Knowing Johnson's military
background, George's mother begged for
compassion. The letter worked.
Hojo granted Georgia Presidential Scholarship
covering all of his expenses and the
two quickly became personal friends.
One day the president even offered George
right across campus in his personal
limousine.
Around the March 4th protests, President
Johnson set up the Pounds Commission to
consider the future of MIT's controversial
war labs, Draper's Instrumentation Lab,
and the Lincoln Laboratories.
He asked George to be the only undergraduate
representative serving alongside Nobel
Laureates Institute professors, and eventually
Noam Chomsky Hojo begged Chomsky to
join the commission, knowing it could
give the radicals a sense that their voice
was represented as part
of the Pounds commission.
George toward the war labs visited the
Pentagon and met with multiple senators.
As he became more informed,
he became outraged
Murderer.
George teamed up with Michael
Albert and the other articles,
and he joined the Rosa Luxenberg
chapter of the sds.
Around the time of the November actions,
George and the other radical articles
stormed in MIT corporation meeting
signs in hand and chance echoing down the
infinite corridor. At the helm of
the boardroom, sat Howard Johnson,
a shouting match erupted.
Former MIT presidents and esteemed alumni
sat in shocked and hojo slowly walked
towards
The door.
He whispered into George's ear
It two.
MIT had lost its patients.
Immediately after the November actions,
a disciplinary committee was formed to
judge the behavior of
the radical students.
Provost Weisner promised Michael
Albert that he was safe,
but President Johnson made it
clear that his days were numbered.
A few days before Christmas, the committee
charged Michael Albert with active
participation in a demonstration
in which violence was present.
The demonstration was a stage interruption
of a general electric recruiting event.
Students for Democratic Society was
tearing itself apart and the national
organization fractured into
increasingly violent variants.
We
Protested, but then we began to realize
that if we really thought those values were
important, that they weren't
gonna come about in the society.
Just by protesting
Protest of Albert's band from campus.
The remnants of MIT's sds.
In a rage, George and three other members
took a battering ram and broke down the
door to President Johnson's
office for a hundred students.
Poured in leaving Provost Wener standing
outside of the occupied territory to plead
with the belligerent. MIT
came down with an iron fist.
The administration pressed charges against
Kaia Feas and two others for disruption
of classes.
George
Was sentenced to state prison
and he earned his degree from mit.
While in solitary confinement, the wardens
frequently threatened to send him to
Bridgewater, a neighboring mental institution
for the criminally insane known for
its vi mistreatment of patients.
As
The protest waned and the radicals broke
off, compromised was eventually achieved.
MIT never canceled any wartime research,
but access to the Lincoln Laboratories was
restricted from the rest of the institute
and Draper's instrumentation that
I was renamed and moved off campus
Store sinking the she by.
Look,
I have an additional, one small additional
question or moral remark to you that is,
that you wish you were very courageous
attitude to towards the war in Vietnam.
How can you survive in an institution
like mit, which is known here as one of the
great war contractors and intellectual,
uh, makers of this war?
Uh, there are two aspects to that.
One is the question how
I'm, how MIT tolerates me.
And the other question is how I tolerate
mit well as to how MIT tolerates me.
Uh, here again, I think one
shouldn't be overly schematic.
It's true that MIT is a major
institution of war research,
but it's also true that it embodies
very important libertarian values,
which are I think, quite deeply
embedded in American society.
Fortunately for the world, they're
not deeply embedded enough to save the
Vietnamese, but they're deeply enough
embedded to prevent far worse,
worse disasters.
And here I think one has
to be a bit qualified.
That is there is imperial
terror and aggression.
There is exploitation, there is
racism, lots of things like that.
But there's also, uh, a real concern coexisting
with it for individual rights of a
sort, which for example, are
embodied in the Bill of Rights,
which is by no means simply an
expression of class oppression.
It is also an expression of
the necessity to defend the,
in the individual against state power.
Now these things coexist, you
know, it's not that simple.
It's not just all bad
or all good, and uh,
it's because it's the particular balance
in which they coexist that makes it, uh,
that makes an institute that produces
weapons of war be willing to tolerate.
Uh, in fact, you know, in many ways,
even encouraged to be quite honest, uh,
a person who's involved in civil
disobedience against the war,
Inter collegially.
We've got over 20 teams, I think cross
country, soccer, baseball, basketball,
track squash, Oh, and a
whole bunch of other ones.
Do a lot of students
participate in sports
intercollegiate and intermurals combined.
There's over 3000 students that
participate in athletics and mit.
So you think athletic is a
major part of the life at mit?
Not really. Damn, I screwed that up.
What does MIT mean to you?
That's a good question.
It mean to me. Yeah.
Should, you should give people
What? Half an hour for that one.
Really, Institute has changed quite
a bit since I've been here for four years,
but trying to change student government,
there's been a flurry of political
activity now over, and I'd be interested
to see what goes on for the next four
years.
Uh,
Well, originally I came here because
I thought I wanted to be an engineer.
And, uh, I, I like has
made me wonder, you know,
many times whether I made the right
choice and I'm still not quite sure
It's, uh, everything I wanted and more
It's
Music and art and lots of science and
math, a lot of interesting people and, uh,
sports and.
It's a tremendous place.
Better than I expected,
and I expected the best.
I'm happy with the, uh, department, mainly
for the kind of access to the professors
that you have there.
Personal opinion, unsubstantiated by
flag is that it's the best place to learn
things like a balloon, a balloon, uh,
pink balloon, beautiful pink balloon.
The grooviest grooviest thing,
just watching it up there.
Coming right down at you.
Yes, there's, I hardly anything
around here is typical.
Counterculture has become such an integral
aspect of the MIT ecosystem that on
campus it can barely be considered
to counterculture.
And anywhere there are impressionable
young minds exercising their freedom and
rebuilding against centralized authority.
There are also drugs, lots of drugs,
an astounding amount of drugs.
By the 1970s, MIT had already earned
a national reputation for its connection to
hallucinogens. According to the fbi,
somewhere between 10 and 90% of the LSD used
in the northeast United
States was produced at mit,
specifically in the iconic Bexley house,
a dormitory directly across the street
from MIT's front door.
The head of house at Bexley was Professor
Jerome let fit who served in the role
alongside his wife Maggie, a
noted writer and TV fitness guru,
famous for her show on Boston's wgbh.
I'm
Still here to lose this flag.
I'm here because I've got
a bad back and a young wife.
I'm in here to lose my tummy.
The title, Short time,
I'm here to lose my belly.
I'd like to wear a size 12.
Most people think you look for
your lifeline and your hands,
but that's not where you look.
You look here
As Besley's Head of House Professor Lettvin
was well known for his views on lsd.
On May 3rd, 1967, Professor Lettvin
debated disgrace psychologist and former
Harvard professor Timothy Leary,
the original representative for mit,
backed out of the debate
at the last minute.
So Lettvin in the middle of
a fog dissection in building 20,
jumped into the debate
with zero preparation.
One evening this spring, as part
of a student run lecture series,
two men died for the souls of students
who packed MIT's Kresge Auditorium.
They were Dr. Timothy Leary, founder
of the League for Spiritual Discovery,
which advocates LSD as a religious sacrament
and MIT professor, Jerome Lettvin,
who thinks of Dr. Leary
as an agent of the devil.
Timothy Leary began experiments with
LSD as a lecturer in psychology of Harvard.
Harvard dismissed him in 1963.
He is now out on a $30,000 bond
for possession of marijuana.
You're not just a college student.
You are not just 22
or 23 or 24 years old.
You're 2 billion years old.
Had you forgotten that?
Matter of fact, what can you remind
you, um, where you came from?
Remember, you spent nine months in
a watery medium, the first nine months,
this trip on this planet.
Remember all that swashing?
Now, could we have the
lights out now, please?
Now, fire is dangerous.
Fire can kill, fire, can burn destroy.
As a matter of fact, the
first fell invented fire.
Prometheus got in a lot of trouble.
The FDA got in Washington.
Remember, uh, they said, Wait a minute.
They're going too fast. Maybe
we're not ready for a fire.
As a matter of fact, that's a question
that often occurs to many of us these days.
Maybe man isn't ready for powerful chemicals
like L s D and the many new ones that
are coming. Maybe man's little mind isn't
ready at this moment in evolution to deal
with too much, too fast
in the way of reality.
Fire is, uh, danger.
Maybe we should pass a law against it.
What are we gonna do about it?
How we gonna keep people from burning
themselves up and hurting themselves and
killing themselves with fire?
Well, we gotta start training our kids
from the time they can listen to us.
Don't you know that the real, real
goal of a scientist is to flip out?
Don't you know that?
Had you forgotten or you thought that
the role of a scientist was to build bigger
and bigger stage sets for the
television show we got going here?
Yeah. Uh, we had a big road running from
the Copson Roberts game here to the Cowboy
Indian Show over there.
And your engineers are supposed to build
them so that we can go faster and faster,
and father and father from television
show to television show.
But, um,
If you take science seriously, and if
you take the history of science seriously,
you'll realize that every great scientist
wasn't in it for the TV show commercial
payoff. Now, the message
I have is an old one.
It's the simplest and most classic message
that even passed on in world history.
It's, uh, those six words drop out,
turn on, then come back and tune it in.
Now, I'm sorry. I mean,
I didn't invent this.
I'm just reading the lines
that were given to me.
You've got to drop out.
Now. Um, there's a lot
said about, uh, education.
Well, you've got to
finish your education.
When I hear that said, uh, I, uh, shutter
and my cells shrink because I'm sorry to
say this, and I say this with great love
and great affection because I'm part of
this whole institution the way I'm going.
But the education system at the present
time of the United States does neurological
damage to the nervous system and
functions as a narcotic addictive drug.
You the younger generation in
particular, have got to drop out.
And by dropout, I mean all the way.
You can't vote.
I urge you not to politic.
Don't pick it.
Don't get involved in any of these menopausal
mind gains because it doesn't make
any difference.
Remember, 1962, we voted for
a peace candidate ,
and you think it makes a difference.
I think it's time to stop, drop out.
Thank you.
When Dr. Timothy Leary, the high priest
of the league for spiritual discovery,
finished speaking, Dr. Jerome
Lettvin took the floor.
Dr. Lettvin was senior psychiatrist
at the Man State Hospital in Illinois.
He is now professor of Communications
Physiology in the departments of biology and
electrical engineering at mit.
He also lectures in the
humanities department.
Dr. Lettvin, who has three teenage children,
is known at MIT as a man students can
talk to.
Now, Tim, your argument is exceedingly
seductive and in the main,
I must admit that I find the press, uh,
middle age and middle class enormously
powerful here in Cambridge.
Irritating is all hell.
The horri part is that I too sit in
front of TV sets, feel myself slumping,
pay the taxes.
But the problem is whether
the naval really replaces tv.
I mean, you sitting
in front of your naval,
you sitting in front of your naval
strike, strike me as being, in a sense,
very little better off in a first.
Let's put it this way, no surprises
are likely to come about
,
And you aren't even beguiled
by good commercials.
Nevertheless, I think that we must
take your thesis extremely seriously,
and I will not do you the dishonor of
either attacking you on scientific rounds
because the question as is very
obvious, is not scientific but moral.
Therefore, for this reason, I would like
to confine my remarks strictly to the Es.
Turn that damn thing off.
I would like to confine my remarks strictly
to the Es technological questions
involved. By that, I mean simply questions
of what constitute good and evil.
But I feel somehow or another that
this man is in the hands of the devil.
That is to say he is in a private hell
of a curious and somewhat Satan devising to
look at this man sitting there with
the smile, this sup smile, ecstatic smile.
I feel sick.
I don't feel that I want to trade.
I feel sick for him.
And I ask of you, how many
would trade he assures you.
He is in the utmost ecstasy
when you can get to him.
Otherwise, he's in that ecstasy.
Why would not any of you trade?
Let us take another trade that
has been offered in the past.
You and I lived through
the period of lobotomies.
You walk into the office,
I don't like my mama.
They lift your up, you know,
slash slash and you go out.
It doesn't matter.
You see, you have traded for,
it doesn't matter, a hunk of brain.
After all brain tissue, as he tells
you, you're losing so much of it.
What's a little bit more?
Really?
No, Here you trade it.
How many of you would take a lobotomy
given the guarantee that thereafter you don't
care? You come in saying,
I don't want to care.
Everything is bothering
the hell out of me.
I wanna stop caring.
I wanna be happy.
And so he takes, you know, bang, bang.
Is this a trade you would make?
You are selling off the no functions.
You're selling off exactly those functions
which have set you aside critically in
every possible way.
You're abrogating.
You're dissolving these henceforth
suspended judgment for a while.
I know a set of physicists who took a
while ago in group because they're curious
people. All physicists
are curious people.
That is, I mean, they're
not curious to look at.
They are.
They took in a group of
about five or six of them,
They took some silo Sabin on the recipe,
gotten from the telephone number here in
Cambridge that you're supposed
to call to get that recipe .
And having taken it, they got
violently sick the first day,
and every one of them for
three months thereafter,
was incapable of doing any theoretical
work on all behavioral counts.
The same but clearly apparent
in their higher critical functions.
And you pay for the vision of
yourself by the loss of judgment.
You pay for getting out
by the loss of judgment.
You pay for whatever visions you get
by this loss in judgment and the loss in
judgment that stays and stays.
Now you might say, How do I know this?
Have I ever taken it?
Huh? No.
And I haven't taken it
for a rather simple reason.
Seems to be a little bit
big, a little steep to pay.
I'm giving the devil my judgment,
my soul, my intellect.
All of the things I've
worked for, for this kick.
Like an infomania.
Not like an erotic person,
but like an infomania.
Does anybody here envy the infomania?
After all, there she is
having orgasm after orgasm.
Wonderful. All day long without a star.
Beautiful, terrific.
And anybody envy her?
Does anybody envy?
Why? Because you didn't envy that guy
who was sitting in the state hospital either.
The kick is cheap, the ecstasy is cheap,
and you are settling for a second rate,
permanent second rate world by the
complete aggregation of the intellect.
In the old days, if it wasn't done by
lobotomy, it was done by psychoanalysis.
Now it's done by drugs.
I can find in myself.
No joy in such an outlook.
I'm David Brinkley.
NBC News, Kent State University in Ohio
has had campus violence for three nights
causing the National
Guard to be called in.
And today the Guardsman opened fire
on the students killing four of them,
two young men and two young women.
Three were shot in the
chest and one in the head.
The students were protesting
the American invasion of Cambodia,
The to see goodbye.
Four months after the incursion on President
Johnson's home countercultural icon,
the Grateful Dad visited campus for an
impromptu concert and celebration of the
November. The rock band performed on the
steps of the student center in front of a
massive crowd. But heavy rains cut
the event short after only a half hour.
Undeterred, the band returned the next
day and performed in the DuPont Gymnasium.
The Epic show lasted for hours with
the Grateful Dead performing 52 songs.
My
Ho Joe's resignation in 1971 marked the
shortest tenure of any president in MIT's
history. Covo Jerome Wener was appointed
his successor despite being seven years
old.
And may your administration be memorable?
Jerome Wiesner was an electrical engineer
who began his MIT career in 1942 at the
radiation laboratory before moving with
many of his colleagues to Los Alamos.
After World War ii, he returned to campus
as a professor of electrical engineering,
eventually becoming the director of
the Research Laboratory of electronics.
He famously said that getting an education
from MIT is like taking a drink from a
fire hose,
Dr. Wesner.
But what really worries me today is what's
gonna happen to us if machines can think
and what interests me specifically is
can they, Well, that's very hard question,
answer if you'd ask me that question.
Just a few years ago, I'd have
said it was very farfetched today.
I just have to admit,
I don't really know.
I suspect if you come back in four or
five years, I'll say, sure, they really do.
Well if you're confused.
Doctor, how do you think I feel?
We also had an impressive KU in Washington
during Eisenhower's administration.
He advocated heavily to close
the missile gap with the Soviets.
But became a voice of
restraint with Kennedy.
He argued against man space missions
because of their extreme danger.
And he warned frequently
of nuclear holocaust.
He returned to MIT to become Dean
of the School of Science, then provost,
then president.
Exciting and challenging.
But doesn't it worry?
Well, sure it worries me, but you know,
the problems posed by the computer are
really no different than the problems
we have with other products of technology.
It's gonna take a great deal of wisdom
on our part to manage them, but if we do,
we are going to make a much better world.
Thank you, Dr. We
Reason, as presidency created
a more well-rounded education,
he established the Council for the Arts
at MIT and created the Ness Student Art
Gallery. He also expanded the scope
of sha, the School of Humanities,
Arts and Social Sciences to west part,
Notable for his enthusiasm for student life
and was often seen around campus
engaging with the student body.
You don't have to actually go out
and ask every student, you know,
what's your opinion on this issue?
Lot of 'em aren't gonna have opinions
on any random issue that you pick,
but you've gotta at least say, We are
about to make a decision on this kind of
thing. Anybody who's interested,
you know, please submit comments.
Now, three years ago, this institute
went to a big decision of should we have a
medical school? I didn't know about it.
I've been here five years
and all the time I was here,
nobody even suggested that we were
going through that kind of a discussion.
Why not? Why weren't
Students? Do you wanna know?
Why not? Yeah. If we had to answer in
four days and because we had, you know,
it was obvious that we couldn't afford
to, Did it make a lot of sense to have a big
exercise and frustration?
Should we or shouldn't we have a medical
school that we didn't have the a hundred
million that was gonna take the bill?
The only way we could say yes is if
we could find somebody who would match the
government money with a
promise of 50 million cash.
And Dr. Killian and I said,
Let's try and then we can,
and we hit five people
that we knew, or x people,
I don't know how many
we finally talked to,
but someone we couldn't even reach who
we thought were interested enough in medical
schools, mit, and a whole thing to
see whether anyone was willing, you know,
to say Sure.
.
And, and nobody did.
This was five days after Howard
became president of this institution.
Six months before we had been totaling
up the bill on what we thought it was.
We were gonna have to raise to do the
things we thought already had to be done to
keep the promises that had been made,
like dormitories and new buildings.
And so, and that came to 200
million that we didn't have.
You know, And I don't see why that kind
of a decision has to be put to a popular
referendum. And in fact, I don't think
It has to be put to popular referendum.
I think you just have to say
that, that you're making it.
So that made, who
Knows, One of the students might have
known somebody with 50 million in his
Pocket.
That's all.
Hello? Yes sir.
This cap, cap on that thing
on I'm gonna do is, you know,
we're gonna do it now two
months from now, but yes.
Uh, I hope you, uh, realize
how strongly I feel about that.
Oh, I do. Yes. And I
hope you agree with it.
Now, the point that I wanna make, however,
is that I think your figure for MIT has
gotta be low. Let me explain.
Mm-hmm. , we're putting over
500 million a year into that damned, uh,
National Science Foundation.
Yes. You know, isn't that true for
the whole, for the whole foundation?
I think that's just right.
But that's all, all of that
money goes to basic research.
In other words, none of that's
for laser be, or, Right.
No, that's right. The the, what I wanna
do is to take that and cut that to a
hundred million. That's, but that
is not just one institution, sir.
I know it is. I know it isn't.
But I understand MIT gets
a hell of a chunk of that.
They get as closely as we can
figure approximately 40 then,
then why can't we cut that?
Well, that's, that, that was,
that was the area we, Well,
but he said there was only
31 million that could.
Be cut. And uh, and, and my point is that
if they get 40 million from the National
Science Foundation, we just cut it out.
Mm-hmm. . Mm-hmm.
. You see my point? Because
that's all subsidy of teacher salaries.
Yeah. But you know, I'm thinking
of a 50, 60% cut, you know, for all.
We've gotta have an austerity
budget next year.
Yeah. And this is an opportunity mm-hmm.
because higher education
is way, way over subsidized.
They've gotten fat.
Yeah. And, uh, frankly, uh, I just
think we ought to bust them hard.
Well, we we're gonna have to
find plenty of areas to do it.
And this is a, uh, perfectly good way.
Well, education generally, you know,
is an area that you've gotta dig into.
Yeah. But anyway, you
can see what I mean.
You can't knock down the university.
You, California is uh mm-hmm.
Lab for whatever the hell they're
doing and this and that.
But what I mean is that when we're
in the piddly wing stuff mm-hmm.
like, uh, oh, you know,
uh, I think some of this transportation and
environment stuff is Yeah.
Where it's, but you know, I want a
ruthless examination of it and we'll just
tighten them all up.
Mm-hmm.  and
not renew the contracts.
Yeah. Well it's right.
And we'll just go right after these
people and knock their brains off.
Now, I've been trying
to do this for years.
You
Know,
The Nixon administration made significant
changes to the federal budget,
including a 10% reduction
of NASA funding in 1971.
After four successful moon
landings, a year later,
humans would stand on the
moon for the last time.
The final Apollo mission launched a
few months after the Watergate scandal,
which marks at the beginning
of the end of the presidency.
Former US President Henry
Truman died in 1972.
And Linda B. Johnson followed in 1973,
meaning that at the time of Nixon's
resignation a year later, there
remains no living US presidents,
among the evidence used against
Nixon West's enemy's list,
which named political opponents deemed
a threat to the Nixon administration.
MIT had more names on this list
than any other single organization,
including Professor
Chomsky and President.
I'm not satisfied with that.
Subsidized they get
By the late 1970s social tension still
pervaded Boston as attempts to alleviate
disparities continued.
It's cheering them a pat.
I'm not for this.
I don't care.
My one will not go to school,
but it's chairman path.
I
Wouldn't care if they were green or purple
with the idea of putting my kid on a bus
when I have a school right across
the street and where they should go.
I don't care what color they are.
All
They want is a seat in this school.
Nothing else.
Let us go to our neighborhood if I, you
And why we was in school that was throwing
glass at black peoples and little kids.
What's with
This again? Ride the clap.
I think it's gonna be all
right if everybody comes.
Stop being scared cuz Shoot, I don't
think there's nothing to be scared of.
Um,
We're, we're for you for believing
the dreams come true.
We're for
Paying
The bills and working the bills for you.
We're for hope, for learning
to cope, for kissing the,
The world outside of Cambridge
was rapidly changing.
The
Students faced increasing financial
challenges as MIT felt the pressures of a
global recession and the economy at
large faced profound de-industrialization.
It was the end of an era.
Ooh.
Things are going get easier.
Ooh. Chow things get brighter
things, things buy.
Yeah. Put and get when the world is much.
Thank you. I moved to recall
the days of World War II when, uh,
loosely n but intense community of science
and technology spanned the Atlantic
between the British on the one hand,
and the Americans on the other side.
Thousands of persons earnestly
engaged in waging that terrible war.
Anxious for the best ideas and the
best criticism on how the weapons of war,
the new weapons, the radar, the aircraft,
all those things which arose at that time
could be used in the search
for the precious victory.
Our power to shape is a
power for good and for evil.
There is no more obvious comment
that I could make than that.
What our power for shaping
means seems to me.
It's double, It implies.
Responsibility for those forms we make.
And since we can shape the world and
can sometimes shape it well, it implies,
I believe, most firmly hope as well for
the forms we can make in the landscape.
When you're saying that, that you're
putting some sort of blame on me, that no.
But then what
Off a spectacular fire,
two workers are dead.
And here's ABC's Charles Murphy.
In the 1980s, the United States government
imposed significant austerity measures,
slashing the federal budget
across all non-essential sectors.
Across the country, research laboratories
and university students looked for news
sources to fill the funding gap.
Private corporations stood
ready to seize the opportunity.
Private companies rapidly expanded
their financial ties to MIT,
offering scholarships to students funding
for professorships and heavily investing
in cooperative projects
with the institute.
This new status quo was embodied
most iconically by the Media Lab
founded 1985 by architect Nicholas Negroponte
and former MIT president Jerome
Weisner. The Media Lab proposed a completely
new model for scientific research and
funding.
The media laboratory at Massachusetts
Institute of is a center for Advanced study
and research. More specifically, the
Media Laboratory is a place where the
invention of new means of communication
is tied to their innovative use.
Instead of competing for public and
private dollars on a per project basis,
the media lab allowed corporations and
government agencies to subscribe to general
research themes. These subscribers
commonly referred to as member companies,
received access to the media, lab's,
human capital, and intellectual property
Designed by I Pay and Partners.
The building was officially
dedicated October 2nd, 1985.
It's equipped with the world's most
sophisticated computing equipment,
including a supercomputer for
mainframes, 60 AI workstations,
and over 300 personal computers for the
production and recognition of all forms of
sound and pictures.
Fundraising is an essential function
of any research lab and marketing is the
engine of fundraising.
But unlike most labs with successful
marketing means publishing papers and
releasing data, the media lab affected
a more our inspiring technique about
The protocols. Yeah, looks
like I'm free this afternoon.
Let's see if he has time.
When can I meet with
Walter This afternoon
With room? Do you want
to meet this afternoon
Walter
Meeting with Walter.
Scheduled today at one, getting
a call from Barry Hi,
In which Media Lab demos captivated
audiences securing press coverage and
attracting investors. Some of the work
at the Media Lab was farfetched and never
intended to have any real impact, but
a number of projects propel digital computing
into the future.
A hundred years ago, I don't think anybody
would've said that machine intelligence
was inevitable or even possible,
but something happened.
Uh, around the turn of the century, it
was discovered that machines could do more
than anyone had dreamed.
It was implicit in the work
of some mathematicians.
And then, uh, the great magician Girdle
discovered that it was possible for a
machine to represent itself,
represent its own workings and.
That was the first glimmering of the
idea that a machine could simulate another
machine or simulate itself.
The idea that a machine was an infinite
source of variations, uh, is a new idea.
And, uh, so I think it
is a new step in evolution.
There's never been anything
like it or an idea like that.
You see, until that point people thought
that each machine did a certain thing,
and that if you wanted something done,
you would have to build a machine to do
that, and that's all it could do.
But this discovery in the
1930s changed our view.
It was discovered that if you
made the right kind of machine,
and that's what a computer is,
it in a sense could do anything.
In 1983, MIT and IBM entered into a hundred
million partnership to create Project
Athena.
Project
Athena is a pioneering experiment in
education at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology. Its overall goal is to find
out how the latest computer communications
and graphics technologies can enhance
all phases of the learning process.
The basic tool of Project Athena is a
campus-wide network of over 2,500 computer
workstations now being installed, this
system will help students and teachers not
only create innovative educational
software, but also to share programs,
to exchange data, and to communicate
with greater ease than ever before.
The project led to the development of
countless new computer system technologies.
It's graphical interface.
Protocol X is used in virtually every
personal computer, even to this day,
and its open source license can be
found in millions of software projects.
These algorithms and protocols became
critical components of a nationwide project.
A network composed of previously isolated
military and university systems.
Researchers were calling
the project internet Project.
Athena changed the face of MIT's campus
and the working lives of MIT students.
Whether they were in a dormitory or
in the student center or in a lab in the
tunnels beneath the concrete, students
could sign into any Athena machine and
access all their files.
Instantly. They could email
professors, take classes,
send direct messages to friends, and access
millions of books and journal articles.
Of course, even with new technology
to help make academic life easier,
students couldn't study all the time.
Doesn't get much above the top
of the, the driver's building,
but you get a good view of the
cord and all the activity here.
This is aur.
Students were finding it increasingly
difficult to prioritize anything other than
school work. As a result, traditions
and student organizations were struggling.
The undergraduate association, the
UA was disintegrated in February of 1983.
The UA held its general assembly in annual
meeting that all members are expected to
attend. The president forgot to show up.
And so did over 100 others.
In total, seven assembly
members attended the meeting.
Students were developing a more
serious approach to academic life,
and they felt like they had to.
Tuition was sky high.
Their futures were full
of questions, not promises.
In response, many students chased after
the high paying jobs of the new economy
with a deregulated Wall Street.
MIT students saw opportunity in high finance
as meritocracy surpassed nepotism jobs
that Morgan Stanley were
no longer limited to.
Legacy Harvard graduates.
MIT students could compete.
The war contractors and government agencies
that protestors denounced in the 1960s
was still intact.
What they now had to compete with these
high paying firms for MIT's most valuable
resource,
More technology.
In January, 1978, NASA screened 8,000
applications to choose 35 individuals for
astronaut. Group eight.
Group eight was the first class of scientists
astronauts chosen in more than 10
years. The proceeding class had been
formed in 1967 when Apollo missions were
failing and the future of
NASA was in serious question.
Throughout
The 1970s, there were actually too
many trained astronauts waiting for the
opportunity to fly in space.
An opportunity that was
becoming increasingly there.
In the 1980s, the dream of becoming
a space fairing people was reborn.
Beautiful, beautiful.
Route
Eight was a trailblazing class of accomplished
scientists and pilots intended to
launch NASA into a new
era of space exploration.
The group included the
first six women astronauts,
the first three African American astronauts,
and the first Asian American
astronaut. Four members of this class
would be chosen to through the space shuttle
Challenger, including MIT
graduate Ronald McNair.
Yep. Much more.
Here he is, .
In 1984, he returned from a successful
flight aboard NASA space shuttle and became
the second black man to fly in space.
It's one of those indescribable things
and uh, a guy can have that pr I'm gonna get
back in line to fly  .
Anyway, thanks.
It's, it's great seeing all of you.
So look around. It's just, uh, really
heartwarming experience and pleasure to see
people who are genuinely appreciative.
People who generally, genuinely express
a certain warmth in your faces.
And it's just nice to see it.
And, uh, I thank you for it.
Thank you for coming out.
Thank you. You take out insurance.
As you move into those
jobs in the industry,
you'll fire the world will
start to get quite frigid.
Those of you that are headed for academia
as either on the elementary, secondary,
or a college level as you move into
those areas in an attempt to rectify the
negative trends in education
throughout our nation today,
you find that the world
can get downright icy,
but do not let the world's adversity
either stifle your enthusiasm,
nor blind your vision.
But the struggle towards excellence must
ever be conducted on the high plains of
self confidence, a sense of
purpose and positive thought.
Go forth with the knowledge
that you are better than enough,
go forth with a desire to accomplish
with desire to contribute to our society.
Great.
Almost all this
I was,
This is shuttle launch control att
two minutes, 20, I mean two hours,
28 minutes in county.
Here comes the, uh, 51 hour flight
crew boarding the elevator, uh,
for the second time in two days.
Commander non McNair and uh, pilot Mike
Smith, followed by Crystal mcCal of teacher
in space, Ellison Zuka and
payload specialist Greg Jarvis.
Big smiles today,
T minus 15 seconds minus Tim.
9, 8, 7 6.
We have main engine.
Start 4, 3, 2, 1 and lift off, lift off
of the shuttle mission and it is cleared
the tower.
Good roll program.
Confirmed challenger.
Now heading down range engines beginning
throttling down now at 94%.
Normal throttles motion.
Most of the plane 104% will
throttle down to 65% shortly.
Engines at 65%.
Three engines running normally
three good fuel ls.
Three good APUS velocity 8 2257 feet
per second altitude 4.3 nautical miles down
range distance, three nautical miles
engines throttling up three engines now
hundred four challenger go and throttle
up thro one minute 15 seconds.
Velocity 2,900 feet per second altitude,
nine miles down range distance.
Seven
Families of the astronauts.
Very carefully.
Obviously a major malfunction.
We have no down link.
Reports from the flight dynamics
officer indicate that the vehicle, uh,
apparently exploded and that,
uh, impact, uh, in the water.
Good evening. Here's what's happening.
The report on the space shuttle disaster
is now in President Reagan's hands and the
public will get a look
at it on Monday tonight.
CNN John Hallman reports some hard
fought battles among members of the
investigative commission
that wrote the report.
One member was harshly critical of nasa
and therein lies the tale that John Hallman
unfolds now from Washington Morning.
It's a commission member Richard Fineman
charged that NASA had virtually ignored
the principles of physics and good scientific
practice in designing, testing,
and building the space shuttle.
The Nobel Prize winning physicist wrote
a section of the final report known as
Chapter F Commission.
Sources say, Chairman William Rogers
read the chapter and was furious.
He called Fineman to Washington
Wednesday and urged.
Honed down his criticism of NASA because
Chapter F threatened to destroy public
confidence in the space agency.
That was Richard Fineman, the Nobel
Prize winning physicist who startled the
commission months signal when he dipped
an O ring into his glass of ice water to
show that it wouldn't work when it
Was cold. Discovered that when you put
some pressure on it for a while and then
undo it, it maintains,
it doesn't stretch back.
It stays the same dimension.
In other words, for a few seconds
at least, and more seconds than that,
there's no resilience in
this particular material.
When it's at a temperature of 32 degrees,
I believe that has some significance for
our problem.
How do you feel about the job
your commission did generally?
I think we did a pretty good job.
It turned out to be easier in some respects
than we could've imagined it was.
I wanted to find out what happened.
I, but
I was curious, why did Chairman Rogers,
uh, say at the White House today that it
would turned out to be more difficult
than he thought it was gonna be?
What was he talking about?
Well, maybe we had different
expectations.
It's strange because at the very
beginning of this commission meetings,
I remember Mr. Rogers saying, Well, of
course we may never find out what may the
accident occur. And that turned
out that's what I meant was easy.
I see.
You know, what happened and you,
You know, what happened? What was difficult,
and I think maybe he's referring to
this, was the discovery of these weaknesses
inside of NASA and their attitudes.
Mm-hmm. , this kind
of illogic about safety and so forth,
which was so extensive from an organization
which had such a reputation in the
country that it was hard for us to
find it out in a sort of emotional way,
is to have to come around and say that
the wizard of ours, which everybody respect,
has nothing behind it.
Another
Area where Boston flourishes
is academics.
The greater Boston area has more students
per capita than any other region in
America. Just across the Charles
River stand, two academic giants.
Harvard University, not far away is
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Tech Students jokingly claim getting
an education at MIT is like trying to drink
from a fire hose
Like the rest of the northeastern
United States.
The temperature in Boston
fluctuates wildly.
The middle of summer is hot and
humid, and the winters can be harsh.
Cambridge had a housing problem.
MIT
Said, Not
Mit, we said, Noted
Mit, despite the cold, a small crowd
of Cambridge activists gathered near Central
Square this afternoon to protest planned
development of 27 acres of property owned
by by mit working with Forest
City, a private developer.
MIT wants to build a multimillion dollar
research and development complex here.
The land known locally as the Simplex
site has been the center of controversy for
more than a decade. Today, opponents distributed
documents they claim show that the
developers deliberately
mislead the public.
By underestimating the size
and scope of the planned project,
MIT continued to expand and that meant
less real estate for low income housing.
A group of protesters, including
both the homeless and homeowners,
demanded that MIT construct at least 250
low income housing units as accommodation
for this planned demolition
Issues. And the needs are so great.
The passion and the outrage about the
conditions under which we live causes us to
go at each other and not to work
together to deal with the real enemy,
which is the greed of mit.
He's right, is right.
The sunset and what started as
a protest turned into an occupation.
100 homeless residents of Cambridge set
up an encampment at MIT's University Park.
They called it Tent City.
In time, the protest arrived
at the hood of MIT's campus.
Students protested at the entrance
of MIT alongside the homeless.
They demanded that the institute accommodate
the residents of Cambridge as it
terraforms the city.
What can happen in the future is directly
related to whether or not people in the
neighborhoods, people across the city
get organized and say very clearly what they
want in a process that they want
to control, the development process,
that they wanna hold the
city, the b, the state,
and the private developers accountable.
People are not opposed to development.
People wanna see things happen
that are in their interests.
Eventually, MIT police stormed
the encampment and shut it down.
Moving tents, clothing and personal
belongings on the sidewalk outside the lot
For
15 minutes this afternoon.
Millions linked hands to raise money
for America's hungry and homeless
Hands across America.
Formed one human chain spanning
16 states in the District of Columbia.
Hens across Massachusetts, stretched
from Boston Common through the public garden
on both the Boston and Cambridge
sides of the Charles River.
Organizers say more than 6,000 took part
in the local effort to help the hungry and
homeless.
I'm Andy Hiller on the
Esplanade this afternoon.
The scene before the people here
joined hens was festive and playful and
party-like, but there was real work being
done and contributions collected and the
work paid off. Do you ever
think about being homeless?
No. Because when people are born, there's
always a place to go no matter what.
It's a juicy steak.
19. Shrimp and steak.
Just 9 99.
Hurry to Red Lobster.
Just two hours ago, Allied Air Forces
began an attack on military targets in Iraq
and Kuwait. These attacks
continue as I speak.
Five months ago, sad ma saying,
started this cruel war against Kuwait.
Tonight, the battle has been joined
With no further due.
Here's
Known.
I guess it's not considered good form
to start by, uh, admonishing your audience,
but I don't think it's
a time for cheering.
Uh, in fact, it's not easy to
talk about this topic at all.
Uh, when we are just short of a decision,
that's going to mean the slaughter of
tens, if not hundreds of thousands of people.
These are on, We're on a sign on.
Yeah. Here we got it.
I think so. Okay.
We'll,
Funding
Is made possible by the
National Science Foundation.
US forces are expected to have an
enormous advantage in combat with Iraq.
That's because new technology allows Americans
to do much of the fighting at night
when they can see, and presumably the
Iraqis cannot seen here in tests in Arizona.
Lantern uses a combination of infrared
and radar technology that turns night in
today. The result is plain to see.
And these are the young men
and women who make new things,
discover and explore and
create new technology.
The key to American economic
growth and national security.
They build things here, things to use,
things that nearly think things that make
life easier.
Hey, where are we on this map?
Huh? Huh? We are right dude.
Right above Ku H City.
We will take a highway down this highway.
As a matter of fact,
What was that?
They build machines and systems than
manage those systems to build more machines
and more systems.
What do you think? Innocent.
And
These
Are practical men and women devoted to
solving problems, some of their own making.
And I think he alive.
Bravo Battery has made it through
the war with zero thumbs up.
In 1985, Yale University, a small
liberal arts college in New Haven,
was looking to hire a new endowment
manager, David Swenson.
A 31 year old working on Wall
Street was given the job,
the investment strategy he would employ
would change American universities forever.
At the time, endowments were expected
to have modest, dependable growth.
The purpose of endowments was to ensure
that universities could function even
through difficult economic environments
to make universities immortal.
Swenson took a new approach.
The financial markets were performing
extraordinarily well,
and Yale had an opportunity
to weep the profits.
Massive tax free profits.
Swenson exposed Yale's investment portfolio
to private equity and venture capital.
Asset classes typically understood
as higher risk investments.
Swenson also forged partnerships with
hedge funds and expanded Yale's investment
arm. As the global economy surged,
so did Yale's endowment.
Yale may have been the first
to benefit from the gold rush,
but its rivals weren't far behind.
Throughout the nineties, elite endowment
managers chased after increasingly ABBA
investment opportunities.
They invested in everything from speculative
internet startups to forest operations
in Romania. The investors at the MIT
Investment Management Company caught on
quickly. The time for
playing it safe was over.
The endowment had to grow or
the institute would fall behind.
In the face of this new reality,
MIT needed a new kind of president,
one who could attract investors
and make lucrative deals.
President Charles Best was well
suited to handle this transition.
He earned a PhD in mechanical engineering
from the University of Michigan in 1967,
where he remained for 20 years working
as a professor and eventually becoming
provost. In 1990, Chuck was appointed.
As MIT's 15th President MIT chose Vest,
an outsider for his technical background
and strong track record in
university administration.
He described his appointment to the
presidency as a call to national service.
For decades, the American Research Universities
have served this nation exceedingly
well. But today the American public
is calling into question the value of our
research. Universities and no longer
tends to view science and technology as the
foundation of progress.
The public's attention is
caught not only by the debate,
over the costs and quality
of undergraduate education,
but by the debate over the
cost and conduct of research.
Vest had assumed the position when the
public private research structure forged by
President Compton and Vannevar
Bush was crumbling.
He committed his presidency to reviving
successful collaborations between academia,
industry, and government.
Now these are the kinds of young
men and young women in whom we,
through the federal government, must
invest if we are going to embrace excellence
rather than mediocrity.
President Vest would lead
the institute for 14 years,
reshaping the appearance of the campus,
reforming student life and pioneering new
initiatives. Nearly one fourth of MIT's
current square footage was built under the
best administration, and he directed
MIT's evolution into a super institute.
His office founded the Picker
Institute for Learning and Memory,
the McGovern Institute for Brain Research,
the Broad Institute and the Institute
for Soldier Nano Technologies.
President
Vest also made headlines when his administration
released a study on the status of
women faculty in science at mit, a report
that acknowledged discrepancies in the
treatment of senior faculty
on the basis of gender.
The report would spark a nationwide reckoning
over gender equality in academia.
At mit, the percentage of women
faculty would increase steadily.
For all the years following the report
in Geneva, Switzerland, Tim Burners.
Leary was working as an independent
contractor at cern,
the European Center for Nuclear Research.
In 1989, he authored a white paper proposing
something he called the Worldwide Web,
a collection of protocols and algorithms
built on top of the internet.
His paper introduced websites, web service
links and error correcting mechanisms,
the innovations that enable the Internet's
evolution into an earth shadowing
system. The web's main innovation was
hypertext, a deceptively simple idea with a
strong history.
Back in 1945, there was
this guy, Niver Bush,
and he was working for the US government
and one of the ideas that he put forth
was, Wow, humans are creating so much
information and we can't keep track of all
the books that we've read or the
connections between important ideas.
And he had this idea called the Memex.
At the end of World War ii,
American scientist and engineer,
Vannevar Bush published
his concept for the memex,
A device to augment human
memory and index information.
He believed people could navigate
information quickly if the process of
cross-referencing was automated.
The most essential feature Bush Road was
the process of tying two items together at
CER Labs in Switzerland.
Tim Burner's, Leary finally
brought the pieces together.
His worldwide web became the first
hyper text tool for the masses.
Because of the way that hyperlinks
were first constructed,
they were intended to be not only used
by many people, but created by many people.
To me, it's one of the most
democratic designs ever created
In 1994 with over 10 million
users now on the web,
Tim Burn Leary came to MIT where he
founded the Worldwide Web consortium.
Swishing, his group would standardize
the new suite of languages and protocols that
the web necessitated through mit, the
web matured and made the internet accessible
to the average person.
With such a powerful invention,
a better world was inevitable.
You don't think that some of the claims
being made for it are hugely exaggerated?
I mean, when the
Telephone was, no. You see,
I don't, I don't, I don't agree.
I don't agree. I think the internet,
I don't think we've even seen the tip of the
iceberg. I think the potential of what
the internet is going to do to society,
both good and bad, is unimaginable.
I think we're actually on the cusp
of something exhilarating and terrifying.
It's just a tool though,
Isn't it? No, it's not.
No, it's an alien life form.
What do you think, I mean,
when you think then about the
It's their life on mine.
Yes. It's just landed.
Here
Was
A violent scene on the Esplanade tonight
when a free punk rock concert and really
got out of
Control. An estimated 50,000 people crammed
the Esplanade to hear the band Green
Day performed.
The band ran from the stage as a
crowd surge fourth during the show.
I didn't think I would have fun here
and I was looking to have at least some fun.
I mean, I wanted a good
education of course, other
Than I guess being a student,
I'm, uh, also run track.
I was involved with the human powered
Hydrofoil team since it was started about
three years ago. I think it's really
easy to join things just in general.
There was a party every night
if you, if you wanna do that.
Fraternities have been integrated
life at MIT since the days before.
It was known as mit.
When Boston Tech was originally
founded in 1861.
There were no dormitories.
In fact, in the history of the institute,
there have never been enough
dormitories to house.
Every undergraduate fraternities
have always been there to close the,
Everything is
Over
And I'm feeling
Since its foundation.
In the 1880s, Greek life has exploded
into a massive cultural force at mit.
Fraternity membership encompassed one
fifth of the student body in 19 hundreds,
one third of the student body in 1915
and to over half of all male students across
more than 25 chapters.
By the end of the 1990s with so many.
Organizations at mit.
Competition is inevitable.
Over the years, fraternities have found
a variety of ways to challenge each other,
including everything from intramural
sports to prank wars.
But undoubtedly, the main competition
between fraternities is rush a period of
about a week when chapters
recruit new members.
Russia's fundamental to Greek life
anywhere, but as is often the case,
MIT students put their own spin on it.
Talk about a management experience.
I, um, so I applied to be rush share.
You gotta figure out how
to go find, you know,
freshman on campus and like reel them
into your fraternity and find the best ones
and convince 'em to join.
And it's intense cuz you're like,
Oh my God, if I don't, you know,
all these 25 other fraternities
are like competing for the same kids.
And like, if I don't do a good
enough job, then, you know,
we don't have a big enough pledge class
and our dues go up and then it's even
harder next year. And like, it's like
this death spiral that it's all my fault,
you know? And then you
start to break it down,
there's a thousand kids who enter the
class, 600 of which are guys, and then,
you know, a couple hundred
join, uh, fraternity.
And so you sort of, okay,
that's a sales funnel.
You figure that out
and you're like, okay.
You start looking at all the
people you have and you're like,
these people are really social.
And so you can send 'em out in the van
to go hang out with kids on campus and get
'em back. And then these people,
they're not that motivated,
but if you give 'em snacks and drinks,
they'll like hang out and tell good stories.
This is like talent management, you know?
And so all these things come back in
a way that I was really not expecting.
Um, and just the feeling of just
like having to figure it out.
But getting that practice in a, in
kind of a safe place was really valuable.
And, and the fraternity was for
me, uh, a great way to do that.
In the 1990s, fraternities at MIT
were experiencing the golden era.
Participation was high and the social
scene throughout MIT was the epicenter for
college students across the Boston area.
At the time, freshmen were not required
to live on campus and they often moved into
fraternity houses. Shortly after pledging
this tradition created the fundamental
divide between MIT men.
They were dorm boys and they
were threat boys, dorm traditions,
and Greek traditions.
And the two social spheres
had little overlap.
Regardless
Of residential status, alcohol plays
a significant role in student life.
In the nineties, many fraternities
had strong cultures of drinking,
but so did dormitories.
Baker House spent 17% of its
student life budget on alcohol,
and all the dorms commonly
hosted unregulated
Parties.
At the peak of its intoxication,
MIT experienced a horrible accident.
In the spring of 1997, a student fell
through this ceiling at Lambda Kay Alpha
falling four stories.
He survived the fall, but there was substantial
injury to both the student and to
the sentiment towards Greek life, the
heavy drinking culture of the student body
came under scrutiny, but for the
most part, life continued as normal
Classes
Were hard, parties were harder.
Eventually, students dispersed for the
summer and took a much needed break from
In the history of mit, there is perhaps
no event more tragic and consequential than
the death of Scott Kruger when Rush concluded
at the beginning of the 1998 academic
year fire game of Delta, known on
campus as Fiji had recruited 12 pledges.
The pledgers moved into their
new home shortly thereafter.
And on Friday, September 26th, the pledgers
attended Fiji's Big Brother Ceremony.
In the tradition of the ceremony, each
pledge received a dedicated big brother in
upperclassmen who could guide
him through life in the fraternity,
through MIT and beyond.
In preparation for the ceremony, pledges
were instructed to drink beer and whiskey
as they all watched
the film, Animal House
La Italian bags
Plans. After finishing the movie,
the pledges were introduced to their big
brothers, and welcome to Step
Closer into the Brotherhood.
Celebrations followed Scott's big, embraced
him and handed him a handle of Bacardi
spice To him.
Celebrations
Went on for hours.
Scott complained of nausea, so the brothers
laid him on a couch to rest and left
him alone for 10 minutes, they returned
to find Scott covered in vomit.
He wasn't breathing.
The paramedics rushed him to the
Beth Israel Deacon, his hospital.
The consequences were swift.
MIT's Fiji chapter was immediately
suspended by the national organization.
All dorms and living groups agreed
to cancel any alcoholic events.
And President Vest promised total reform.
President Vest pledged to rebalance the
arrangement between fraternities and mit.
The relationship had always been one
of symbiosis of mutual benefit and respect.
Students enjoyed more robust social lives,
and MIT had a solution to its housing
problem. But the administration
had lost its patients.
President Vest promised to build
more undergraduate dormitories,
providing more options for
students to live on campus.
Responsible graduate students were
also hired to live in and supervise every
fraternity and independent living group.
From that point forward three years
later, after extensive arbitration,
president Charles Best personally
apologized to Scott's parents.
In his eyes, he and MIT failed Scott.
It was MIT's responsibility
to keep him safe.
Universities across the country
saw the writing on the wall.
A national reporter for ABC
News described the new paradigm
After the student movement of the 1960s,
students asserted many of their adult
rights by marching on campuses
and going to war.
This translated into an attitude that
schools had no legal responsibilities.
Now schools are assuming liability in
administrative remarked parents have much
greater expectations of what
the college's role should be.
What you see is a shift.
Schools now function a
lot like businesses do.
They sponsor activities
and the courts see that.
Uh, today we've had a national tragedy.
Uh, two airplanes have crashed into the
World Trade Center in an apparent terrorist
attack on our country.
I have spoken to the vice president,
to the Governor of New York,
to the director of the fbi, and I've ordered
that the full resources of the federal
government go to help the victims
and their families and the,
and to conduct a full scale investigation
to hunt down and to find those folks who
committed this act.
Once news of the attack on the World
Trade Center reached the Student Body campus
was quiet, students packed into the
Athena clusters, looking for information.
But CNN's News website had crashed
from the massive volume of traffic in the
uncertainty. The administration decided
to proceed with normal operations and
students continued going to class
for the remainder of the day.
On the evening of September 11th, President
Vest announced that the following day
would be a half day with classes ending
early so that students could attend a vigil
on Kresge lawn. Student responses to
the September 11th attacks were varied.
Some students condemned the attacks
as senseless violence and of those who
condemned some called for
peace and others for war.
Other students will personal pieces
expressing their struggles with hope and
purpose in the light
of their own mortality.
Some criticized America's response
to the tragedy while others praised MIT's
community vigil and blood drive.
Others still were critical of the institute
complaining that MIT did not slow down
enough for the community
to process what had happened.
These editorial lists provided about
at least one thing in the world.
After nine 11, the institute
did not slow down,
And because it's all changed
now, I can get by with saying it,
but the first time I visited
here and drove down Vassar Street,
the backside of the campus,
I was actually appalled.
I could not believe that this
was the famous mit we had, um, uh,
still buildings that had been
built during World War ii, uh,
that were made out of asbestos
shingles and chainlink fences,
and just looked miserable.
Front door of the campus
is of course, the wonderful,
iconic view of killing court and the
great dome and the columns and so forth.
Absolutely beautiful.
So there was a little something
in me that said, you know,
wouldn't it be nice to
change this a little bit?
And then that began to be built upon
by the things that needed to change a bit in
the student and and
community, uh, culture.
At the dawn of the new millennium, Charles
Vest had already been president for 10
years, molding the institute into the
modern mit The endowment was surging,
which meant more buildings, more
institutes, and more prestige.
President Vest remembered
the promises he had made.
In 2002, construction of Simmons Hall
was completed creating space for 300 more
undergraduate students.
The birth of Simmons finally made
possible a Landmark Institute policy.
From that point forward, all MIT freshmen
would be required to live on campus.
As students moved into Simmons,
and Rush was severely regulated,
President Vest was seizing his opportunity
to correct the excesses of student life
at mit.
So this set us up for some,
um, some real tensions and,
and many of us felt that we were not
kind of engaging the students in a broader
academic community as undergraduates,
that their loyalty was to small housing
groups that might be an
independent living group,
might be a floor in the dormitory, literally
might be a fraternity or a sorority.
But because of the pressure, they
sought out these small groups.
And historically they had gotten
very great support out of that,
But still there was just some
underlying things and some, uh,
sort of social trends that had started
back in the seventies that had never quite
been given up.
So there was a lot of
that that had to be done,
and a bit of what I just called
sanding down around the edges.
You know, you want this to be
an intense, rigorous education.
That's what we do at mit, but you
don't want to become a parody itself.
So we did feel that we had to do some
things to kind of brighten and lighten up the
environment, uh, a little bit.
See,
MIT has a very unique housing system.
Unlike other schools which randomly
assign you to a freshman dorm at mit,
you have a choice in where you live.
We have 11 dormitories and five cultural
houses, all with their own personality,
traditions and quirks.
Above all, we want you to live in
a place where you feel comfortable.
Three, two,
But never.
The pilot doesn't have to take care of
stabilization of the system that that's done
by automatic control system.
What we have contributed, uh, is
autonomous aggressive maneuvering.
The expanded research structure driven
by the vest administration was thriving and
MIT's prestige continued to grow as
college admissions nationally became more
competitive. President Vest fundraising
campaign was reaching new heights,
raising money from aex of high net worth
individuals who had recently begun playing
a larger role in MIT's financing.
By the early two thousands, MIT was well
endowed with three core funding pipelines
from the federal government, private
industry, and wealthy individuals.
And as the government's financing
continue to wane the latitude,
we're happy to fill in the gaps.
One
Of the great monuments of the modern
MIT is the Ray and Maria data Center,
designed by a now architect, Frank
Gary, and built on top of building 20
this data center housed the computer science
and artificial intelligence lab or sea
sale, a merger between the laboratory
for computer science and Marvin Minsky's AI
Lab.
Frank wanted to try some new materials.
He was enthralled over the
idea of building in Boston.
You know, this building's largely brick.
So he was quite invested in this building,
spent a lot of time understanding how
the students and the faculty
live and work and what we need.
He conceived this student's street idea
that would, would bring people together.
But what the world was seeing in
the early days was the sort of, uh,
helicopter view of photographs
and models and things.
Believe me, a lot of people
didn't like what they saw.
Well, it's, it's, it's a
very interesting building.
You're in the state building.
Yeah, it's right on top. Building 20.
Used to be, but right.
It's not really a place to work.
I do my work at home, though
The 300 million research facility was
funded by a number of wealthy MIT alumni.
Besides waste data donors included
Moist Chang and Alexander Dryfus.
Bill Gates also donated,
although he went to Harvard.
At the height of this expansion, President
Vest announced one of the most
revolutionary projects of his career.
MIT Open Courseware, unlocking knowledge.
In 2003, MIT launched Open Courseware
or O C W. The initiative released most of the
institute's educational content
onto the internet for free.
It was a groundbreaking step in the movement
for open access to education and the
use of digital platforms for learning.
Many professors and administrators thought
it would defeat the purpose of attending
MIT in person, but vests
saw it differently.
Meanwhile, MediaLab founder, Nicholas
Ponte, was also attempting to use the
internet to make the
world a better place.
One laptop per child, .
That's our name and our vision.
We want to create educational opportunities
for the world's poorest children by
providing each and everyone with a rugged
lowcost, low power connected laptop.
No matter what language they
speak or where they live,
the exo connects them to each other,
to the world, and to a brighter future.
Why would a kid in the developing world
need a laptop of all things when they might
not have food? They probably, some
cases don't live beyond the age of five.
They don't have drinking water, uh, and
the parents earn a dollar a day or less.
Good grief. Why should
they have a laptop?
Take the word laptop and substitute
the word education, and nobody would say
That. Bringing education to children all
over the world with one laptop per child.
My fellow citizens at this hour, American
and coalition forces are in the early
stages of military operations to disarm
Iraq, to free its people and to defend the
world from grave danger.
On my orders, coalition
forces have began striking,
selected targets of military importance
to undermine Saddam Hussain's ability to
wage war.
In 2004, after 14 years of service, Chuck
Fest stepped down from the presidency.
The task of appointing his successor
was a difficult one, and ultimately,
the MIT Corporation selected another outsider
to continue the proliferation of the
institute
Put quite simply, I want MIT to be the
dream of every child who wants to make the
world a better place.
Susan Hockfield did an undergraduate
study at the University of Rochester,
earning a degree in biology.
In 1973, she continued to research career
at the Georgetown University's School of
Medicine and became an NIH Postdoctoral
Fellow at the University of California,
San Francisco. She worked as a research
scientist at the Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory for five years, and in 1985,
she joined the faculty at Yale serving as a
professor until her appointment
as provost in 2003.
In 2004, she was appointed
the 16th president of mit.
I owe a second, and most profound thanks
to all the MIT presidents who have come
before.
Especially those who
are here with us today.
Howard Johnson, Paul
Gray, and Chuck Vest.
And I am immensely grateful to these three
great leaders for sharing with me their
institutional insight and
their abiding love for MIT
President Hockfield built on the momentum
set by the Vest administration without
missing a beat, applying her unique
perspective as MIT's first president.
With the background in the Life Sciences
Hawk Field expanded MIT's footprint in
biology in 2006, course 20 was
redesignated as bioengineering.
And in 2011, President Hockfield launched
the Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer
Research. A basic cancer research center
comprising over 50 laboratories and 1000
researchers.
All of you are, Hes to a legacy
of innovation, not just here,
but across America that has improved
our health and our wellbeing and helped us
achieve on parallel prosperity.
You just get excited being here and seeing
these extraordinary young people, uh,
and the extraordinary leadership
of Professor Hockfield, uh, because,
because it taps into something
essential about America.
In 2011, the final year
of her presidency,
President Hockfield celebrated some
of the ultimate successes of her tenure.
The opening of the Fairy Boys Massey
Hall marked the central achievement of
Hockfield campaign for students.
The new dormitory was actually a renovation
of one of the oldest buildings in
Cambridge, a building older than campus
itself, which had been serving as a
graduate student, residents
known as Ashtown until 2008.
Like Simmons Hall Massey would
be designated as a tier one dorm,
boasting some of the most sanitized
living conditions on campus.
The renovation of Massey created
space for over 450 more undergraduates.
2011 also marked 150 years
since the institute's founded.
And just like any proud parent, President
Hawk Field celebrated by throwing a
massive birthday party.
Celebrations
Included a convocation with 8,000
attendees and an outdoor art festival
illuminating the campus.
It was also an MIT open house, a free
public science fair with 20,000 visitors
exploring innovation and
research across campus.
As part of the centennial activities,
MIT also conducted a massive oral history
project, recording interviews with dozens
of longtime members of the MIT community
and publishing them on
the internet for free.
Professor Chomsky, thank you for talking
with us for this series of interviews
being recorded for MIT's CSWE Centennial.
You've been at MIT since 1955 for virtually
your whole career and for more than a
third of MIT's existence.
Is it still as hospitable a
place for you as it was then?
Well, that's, it's, it's grown a lot.
So in, in the mid fifties, you
kind of knew everybody, you know,
so you had a question, you wanted
to talk to the provost, you know,
he's a personal friend and so on.
But, uh, now it's, uh,
far for each individual.
It's kind of more impersonal because
it's so much larger and more complex.
But it remains, uh, it, in my experience,
pretty much same kind of place,
Uh, as one man I can see.
I wonder whatever happened to him.
He was a very angry man.
Uh,
Despite only serving for eight years,
President Uckfield made a remarkable
impression on the institute,
and under her leadership,
MIT matured into the globally connected
temple of research that it is today.
In 14 years, Chuck Vest
raised 3.5 billion in gifts.
Susan Hockfield raised the
same amount in half the time,
and a 10 saw the endowment expand
by 73% by the early 2010s,
the terraforming of Cambridge
was in full force.
In 2011, MIT received approval for a
700 million overhaul of its properties in
Kendall Square. The eastern side of campus
known mostly for its parking lots and
dilapidated factors. MIT's original plan
for expansion into Cambridge included only
120 housing units.
But in an echo of previous
conflicts with the community,
local residents complained in response
to the demand for more housing in the area.
The Hawk Field administration promised
that construction would include more luxury
apartments and that MIT would
cultivate new life in the area.
The overhaul was extremely successful,
and Kendall Square rapidly became a hub for
big tech firms, biotech startups,
and pharmaceutical giants.
MIT's campus was also experiencing
a turning point.
In 2013, the iconic Bexley Hall sitting
directly across from the entrance of MIT
had a problem. Its poorly maintained.
Structure was becoming untenable, and
the administration was losing its patients.
On May 7th, 2013 with final exams approaching,
MIT announced a three year closure
of Bexley Hall for Innovations.
The plan was to repair interior water
damage and other signs of age that render did
unsafe to live.
In Besley's 116 residents had two weeks
to prepare for their three year eviction
and figure out how to preserve
this century old culture.
But five months later, after initial
inspection of the building,
MIT's department of facilities recommended
the total demolition of Bexley.
In the administration's view, it was
too expensive to properly repair the dorm,
and demolition would alleviate
many other headaches.
Some report that during the demolition,
firefighters had to blast plumes of
besley's dust and debris
away from the student center,
as it likely contained asbestos
and countless other carcinogens.
I can't believe he.
In October, 2015, Bexley Park was established
in the place of the legendary dorm
what was once an incubator for America's
counterculture and a hotbed for FBI.
Investigations is now an additional
patch of green space.
But when it came to major changes,
students had no reason to think that the
administration would stop.
At Bexley, MIT introduced new
regulations on student life,
like heightened security at dormitory
entrances, mandatory approval of all parties
and more patrols from the MIT police.
In 2014, course 11, Professor Cynthia
Barnhart was appointed as chancellor,
the primary authority
of a student life at mit.
She often said that her priority
was the safety of all students.
A few months into her administration,
she visited East Campus for a dinner with 60
of its residents. In anticipation
of this meeting,
residents and alumni of
Senior House, Random Hall,
Bexley and East Campus came together
to create, this is East side,
a collection of personal essays, treatises
and vignettes that offered a glimpse
into MIT's most cultured dorms.
Despite an out cry of love and support
for MIT's stranger dorms from students,
alumni, and professors, the project
could not hold back the tide
a new administration was forming, and
the trends of the past few decades were only
accelerating.
Sorry for interrupting, but I just
wanted to wish the class of 2013 a hardy
congratulations on your
graduation from mit.
You know, you were the first class that
I admitted as the Dean of Admissions,
which makes you particularly special.
We admitted you to MIT because we knew
that you were awesome and you were gonna do
great things on our campus and beyond.
And I wanna wish you well
as you go out into the world,
be awesome and make the
world a better place.
Well, the military is somewhat
under misunderstood.
I think actually I'm a pretty
good position to know it.
I've been at MIT for, I don't
know, 65 years, 60 years I guess,
and MIT is a good example of one crucial
function to the military system.
Uh, for many years, right into the 1970s,
MIT was almost a hundred percent funded
by the Pentagon. Uh, it was also the main
academic center of resistance against the
Vietnam War.
Uh, my lab, in fact, was one
of the main academic centers.
I was up for a long jail sentence.
The Pentagon didn't give a damn.
If you wanna overthrow the
country, that's your business.
They don't care, you know, But what they
did give a damn about is they're creating
the next phase of the high tech economy.
The Pentagon was, and remains to
a large extent, a kind of a funnel, uh,
but to which taxpayers poor
funds diluted into thinking.
You know, we're defending ourselves
from whoever it may be,
and the money goes into developing the,
uh, next phase of the high tech economy.
So if you use a computer or you
use the internet, uh, uh, you know,
you fly an airplane, which
is a modified bomber and so on,
you're taking advantage of the role
of the dynamic state sector, of the
Economy's dramatic facelifts of campus.
And Cambridge would be continued by
President who for the first time since
Paul Gray was an MIT insight.
Raphael wife was born in Venezuela to
Jewish refugee parents who had fled the Nazi
advance in Eastern Europe.
He did his undergraduate study in
Venezuela at the University of Carbo,
earning his degree in
electrical engineering.
In 1973, he came to the United
States for graduate school.
Earning a PhD from Stanford in 1979.
In 1980, he joined the MIT faculty
as an assistant professor of electrical
engineering receiving tenure in 1985.
In 2004, he was named the Far Boy's Massey
Professor of Emerging Technology and was
named Provost. A year later, he served
his provost at the Institute for seven
years. And in 2012, Rafael wife was
appointed the 17th president of mit.
Susan Hockfield passed the baton to
president right in a smooth transition of
power. One of the first initiatives to
accelerate under the Rife administration was
edX. edX was an evolved form of MIT X.
It was a partnership between MIT and Harvard
to advance the goal of giving high quality
and free online education to users
across the world. Today, edX has
grown to a cooperation between over 160
institutions, and it has reached
tens of millions of students
Globally.
Administration was dedicated to strengthening
the entrepreneurial spirit of the
modern mit. In 2016, MIT announced the
engine, a deep tech startup incubator,
which provided portfolio companies with
both financial capital and access to the
institute's advanced research labs
Through
The engine. MIT's fundamental research
could be more easily commercialized.
In the same year, MIT launched Sandbox,
a program that supplied any MIT student or
faculty member with mentorship
and cash for their new startup.
2016 was an encouraging year for MIT's
future and also an important milestone in
its history. Five years after
celebrating its 150th anniversary,
MIT celebrated its centennial.
MIT 2016 marked the hundredth anniversary
of MIT's move from Boston to Cambridge.
The institute celebrated with special
events from February through June.
One of the most notable events was
an open house held on April 23rd,
one week after campus, PV weekend.
It was similar to the open
house of the 2011 celebrations,
but executed at an even larger scale.
It was a science fair of science fairs,
a so-called Disneyland for nerds.
For five hours on a Saturday, MIT opened
its doors to the public and 20,000
visitors toward more than 150
labs and spaces around campus.
Two weeks later, the campus celebrated
moving day, the flagship event of MIT 2016,
Somewhere
Beyond the
Sea reminiscent of the
original moving day.
In 1916, the MIT community crossed from
Boston to Cambridge by various methods
Stands on golden watches.
The ships somewhere the sea.
She's there watching for me.
If I could fly like birds,
Then
Straight to it's, they understand
The festivities culminated on
May 7th with a toaster attack,
the closing ceremony on Cleon Court through
with the MIT community coming together
to celebrate MIT success.
We a short from Boston to Cambridge of
360 1 4 suites plus minus one year journey
from the industrial age
to the technology age,
from a vocational school to a quality
technique university in the greatest research
tradition, from a assortment
of buildings to the unified,
from a local institution to a global,
from Boston Tech to Massachusetts Institutes
technology.
How about architectural genius
and Pritzker Prize winner I,
Richard Fineman.
In 2016, under President Life's Leadership,
MIT finally accomplished its mission.
MIT had finally made a better world.
The better World fundraising campaign
was President Re's continuation of the
tradition set by his predecessors.
Its aim was to supply the institute with
the funding necessary to secure its status
as an elite global institution.
The campaign was extremely successful,
raising $3 billion in five months.
The funding provided resources for the
renovation of building nine and building two
MIT Better World also enabled
the construction of W 97,
building 12 and the new
MIT Museum Re's campaign.
Also, boy, new initiatives and research
centers, including the Bennett W Go Center
for Finance and Policy, the Hawk,
ean and Kay Lisa Young Center for Autism
Research. The Abdu Latif
Jamil World Education Lab,
The Abdu Latif Jamille Clinic
for Machine Learning and Health.
And the Stephen a Schwarzman
College of Computing.
MIT ended its 2017 academic year
with another massive celebration.
One world at MIT was a festival showcasing
the diversity and talent within the MIT
community. On a Saturday afternoon in
April, 1600 members of the community came
together to watch performances from
student groups and cultural organizations.
Later
In the evening, the number of attendees
grew to 9,000 with students, faculty,
and staff dancing together under
four culturally themed tents.
The event was another resounding success,
and all levels of the MIT community
looked forward to the second annual of
what students had begun to call 10 parties.
So many people at mit, let me tell
you, MIT right now, y'all in a box.
They have you in a box.
You can save the world, but you are
working on things that are too small.
Take a step back, Stop worrying about,
stop worrying about your college, uh,
your loans. Stop worrying about what
job that they got waiting for you in Silicon
Valley, mit.
You can save the world.
Kids in college.
You could save the world. I'll put
my life on this interview right now.
It's up to y'all.
Y'all. The future, y'all.
The future. But what y'all working
on right now working on,
I'm working on this 3D printed thing
that is funded by, funded by Judo,
Jeffrey Epstein.
In September, 2019, the MIT Media
Lab was making national news.
Its director at the time was Joey
Ito, a DJ turned entrepreneur,
who had been leading the lab since 2011.
He was excellent at communicating science
and technology to a general audience.
Joey's the expert, so
I'm gonna defer to him.
Uh, but my, my general
observation, as you said,
is that it is seeping into our lives
in all sorts of ways that we just don't
notice. Mm-hmm.
, I feel like
this is the year that, uh,
artificial intelligence becomes
not just the computer science problem,
but something that.
The White House that I, I've been
working very closely with a fryer in the
Dominican order who's trying
to understand, um, you know,
Bitcoin encryption and ai, um, from
the perspective of the Catholics.
And so, so I think that, that a lot
of other people need to be involved,
and the difficulty has been that
the computer science community,
they're not an easy gang to talk to.
And so, and I think, you know, the White
House here, your, your team and yourself.
I, you've, you've probably gotten your
head around this more than any other, um,
anybody else in, in history.
And it's, it's good timing because
I think everybody needs to understand it.
And I think that that's
On August 15th, Joey Ito apologized to
the Media Lab community for his relationship
with Jeff Leary Epstein for visiting
his estates and for allowing Epstein to
contribute money to
the lab in recom Pence.
He vowed to return the Epstein money
and to fundraised the equivalent amount to
donate non-profits that help
survivors of sex trafficking.
Ito claimed to have no knowledge
of Epstein's horrific crimes,
and he ended his apology by inviting any
member of the Media Lab community to reach
out to him directly.
Within 45 minutes, a flowy
of emails came storming in.
Some people challenged Joey Ito's apology
and claims of ignorance while others
stood up for him and pointed fingers
at the system that allowed for a man like
Jeffrey Epstein to get close to the lab.
After a day, the discourse was moved to
a scheduled town hall meeting to be held in
person at the media lab.
Over time, it was revealed that Jeffrey
Epstein consistently visited the media lab
throughout the 2010s to meet MIT's
top scientists and administrators.
Epstein's presence at the media
lab was always difficult to hide.
The conference rooms are made of
glass and meeting calendars are public.
Peter Cohen, the director of the
Media Lab's funding and expansion,
cooperated with ETO to conceal
Jeffrey Epstein's donations,
mocking them as anonymous
and using the secret code.
Jay, when mocking the
calendars for his visits.
Jeffrey Epstein was a billionaire
child sex trafficker.
He first entered the public eye in the
1990s when the media described him as a
successful hedge fund manager who went
on lavish trips around the world with his
friends. Epstein described himself
as a philanthropist of science.
He offended the world's top academics
and innovators invited them to as many
estates around the world, funding their
labs, and promoting their research.
Marvin Minsky is a computer scientist,
and he is widely recognized as, uh,
one of the founders, perhaps the
founder of artificial intelligence,
cognitive science, and robotics.
He is responsible among other things,
for the first neural network simulator,
the first computer simulation
of semantic memory.
But, uh, perhaps most significantly,
he was, uh,
inspired Arthur C. Clark when he was,
uh, writing 2001 a Space Odyssey and served
as consultant for that movie,
uh, in particular for the computer.
How, uh, Marvin Minsky is Professor of
Media Arts and Sciences Emeritus at mit.
Jeffrey Epstein was particularly
close with Marvin Minsky.
They organized two academic conferences
together, one in 2002 on artificial
intelligence and another
in 2012 on existential visc.
The conference withheld on Epstein's
private island, Little St.
James, Virginia.
Jeffrey, a victim and survivor of Jeffrey
Epstein, later named Marvin Minsky.
Among the powerful men, she
was directed to have sex with.
Jeffrey
Epstein went to jail just
before 10 this morning.
He pleaded guilty in open court.
He agreed to serve a total of 18 months
in the Palm Beach Detention Facility.
MIT professor Seth Lloyd visited Epstein
as he served time in the Florida jail for
quote, for curing a
child for prostitution.
Lloyd later explained his students during
the lecture that Jeffrey Epstein was very
charming. Epstein continued his philanthropy
work after his 2008 conviction,
and by all accounts, he continued
to traffic young women and girls.
According to MIT's official
report, between 2013 and 2017,
Joey ETO and Seth Lloyd invited
Epstein to campus nine times.
Professors who accepted Epstein's
gifts would present their work to him,
discuss hard-hitting ideas, and
make plans for future patronage.
The email states that Joey ETO invited
MIT undergraduates to meet with Jeffrey
Epstein,
Billionaire
Businessman, Jeffrey Epstein was arrested
in New York Saturday on federal charges
related to sex trafficking.
The 66 year old hedge fund manager
has long been accused of sexually abusing
underage girls.
In 2007, he pleaded guilty to two prostitution
counts in Florida as part of a
controversial deal to avoid federal charges,
he was sentenced to 13 months in jail.
MIT is facing more backlash
from its own staff.
After it was revealed, the school
took money from Jeffrey Epstein.
At least two high profile researchers
have reportedly announced plans to resign in
protests.
On September 4th, 2019, the media lab
held a town hall to address the growing
scandal. Professors, administrators, graduate
students, and MIT undergrads gathered
to hear from Nicholas Negroponte,
the founder of the Media Lab himself.
He also had a decade long relationship
with Jeffrey Epstein and was known to have
flown on Epstein's private jet,
A building full of interdisciplinary
people who all had as a common vision making
the world a better place.
At the end of the Town Hall,
Nego Ponte reminded his audience,
If you wind back the clock,
I would still say Take it.
Upon further investigation, MIT revealed
that President Rafael Life signed a thank
you note to Jeffrey Epstein In 2012, after
Epstein donated another six figure gift
to Professor Seth Lloyd.
It was the sixth week
of life's presidency.
In exchange for their support, the federal
government and private corporations
largely seek MIT's intellectual
property and talent.
However,
The quid pro quo for wealthy
individuals is more personal.
Which donors of MIT get to
share the institute's prestige.
They are invited to attend MIT's galas,
and they rub shoulders with top professors.
MIT has an entire administrative apparatus
to celebrate and appease these donors
whose intentions may vary wildly.
At the time of the controversy
at the Media Lab,
the new facility was only
about seven years old.
The hundred million building was
designed by a noun Japanese architect,
Fujiko Maki, and was constructed as a
direct extension of the Media Lab's original
Reasoner building designed by imp.
The building is also about
65 feet from Senior House.
Senior House was MIT's first
dormitory established in 1916.
Similar to Bexley Hall, Senior House
was filled with mules lo and tradition.
However, unlike Bexley, the senior
house building was in fine shape,
but the new administration was increasingly
unhappy with senior house students
in June, 2016.
As both MIT and Senior House wrapped
up their centennial Chancellor,
Cynthia Barnhardt made an announcement.
After extensive research, data
collection and committee meetings,
Barnhart announced that no freshman would
be allowed to move into senior house in
the fall of 2016.
She revealed some concerning statistics.
From 2004 to 20 15, 80 4% of MIT students
earned their undergraduate degree in four
years, and just 7.5% dropped out.
But for students who began their
freshman year in senior house,
the four year graduation rate was
only 60%, and the dropout rate was 21%.
Barnhart also cited credible concerns
of illegal drug use at Senior House and her
genital sense that it was an
unsafe environment for students.
After massive outcry from students and
alumni for this potentially fatal blow to
senior house, the tech printed
the administration's response.
The chancellor states that
this is not a punitive measure.
Rather, it is a move to support dorm
residents and foster academic success and
community wellbeing. Cynthia Barnhardt
promised to work with the senior house
community to address these disparities
and solve the senior house problem.
She assembled a working group of
47 student leaders, faculty members,
graduate residents, and administrators
to spark a turnaround for senior house.
But in the spring 2017
semester, the tone shifted.
The turnaround meeting suddenly
ended, and instead,
the MIT administration began
a closed door formal review.
The chancellor's staff interrogated every
resident of Senior House individually
with no legal representation.
By the end of the semester, five Senior
House sophomores face disciplinary.
For legal drug activity, allegedly having
purchased bulk orders of cocaine via the
dark net. Coincidentally, the tour
project, which maintains the dark net,
was created by an alum of senior house.
The crackdown continued, the
administration shut down stairs,
an annual festival where countless senior
house alumni were turned to their former
home. In June, 2017, Barnhart's
committee announced Pilots 2021,
a new program where all residents of senior
House must be formally admitted by the
MIT administration.
It was simply too dangerous to allow
senior house's culture to continue.
So the Chancellor's Office attempted
to create an entirely new one from scratch,
built on the principles of career
exploration, food and cooking,
and mind and body wellness.
The crowd was into it.
There was lots of sweets and mugs.
So overall, great event
Fizzled out, but the result was final.
Senior house was dead.
I'm
Gonna lose it.
Substance abuse.
In the fall of 2017, MIT announced
that senior house would be converted into
housing for graduate students.
From then onward, it would
be known as 70 Amherst Street.
The national media viewed this saga as
yet another turning point in university's
lurch towards total safety
Wired magazine contended.
The knowledge economy means people
need more and more schooling,
which in turn extends the
length of adolescence.
This has led to a trend of administration's
attempting to control every aspect of
student's lives. It sets up a
naturally combative relationship,
especially in an environment
as academically difficult as mit.
It's you, the student against the I.
Uh, it used to be the students were
in charge of absolutely everything.
The students were the desk workers who
did security, did packages, sold stamps,
sold soda, you know, whatever, rented
out movies, whatever they wanted.
Uh, students were in charge of keeping,
uh, kitchens cleaned, you know,
in charge of a lot more around
the dorm than they currently are.
Like one by one, like responsibility
is being taken away.
Students these days have to jump
through so many hoops to do anything.
There's, there's, there's so much liability
that they have to worry about that we
just did not worry about.
And
Drinking the destruction of senior house
left the east side with just two dorms,
Random Hall and East Campus.
And a clock was ticking on the west
side of campus where Burton was physically
crumbling. Years after the
closure of senior house,
MIT announced that East Campus and,
but would be shut down for maintenance.
Each
Round of maintenance comes with inia
of meals and to have placements to the dorms
foundation,
There's a new dorm going up.
And as soon as that's ready, as soon
as the other renovations and other dorms are
done, they're gonna renovate East Campus
and they're gonna renovate it out of
existence. The building may still
exist, it might still be a dorm,
but they are going to make sure
that you're not painting murals,
you're not modifying any portion, you're
not knocking holes in the wall to put in a
fish tank. You know, you're not,
you're not doing any of the things.
You're not given the freedom to express
yourself that the East side culture
requires.
There's so much variety
and so much choice, um,
and so much independence for students.
Uh, and I think that's like
very much linked to MIT's values,
and I hope that people come to realize
that, who, uh, have control over, um,
their future.
In fall 2018, MIT Nano opened its doors.
The 400 million facility was
itself an engineering marvel.
And just like how the data center was
a commitment to computer science research,
MIT Nano embodies the institute's commitment
to the future of nanotechnology
Located on our third floor.
The MIT Nano Immersion Lab is an environment
developing new software and hardware
concepts for immersive experiences.
Two weeks after MIT Nanos grand opening
president wife announced the Stephen a
Schwarzman College of Computing wis
office called it the most significant
restructuring of MIT in 70 years.
My intent with this gift is
to make the world a better place
Founded
On slavery and colonialism.
At mit, we take very seriously at responsibility
to prepare our students to be
leaders, and to be leaders in addressing
and solving the most important challenges
the world is facing.
We have done that for generations,
and we will continue to do that.
And now more than ever, we need to prepare
students to understand the ethics and
societal implications of these
technology and these advancements.
And
We're in a unique.
In history, but we actually can do those
Things.
The college established 50 new endowed
faculty chairs and it further solidified
MIT's devotion to computation
and artificial intelligence.
Hi, I'm Russell, and this is Spa.
It's
Hi everybody, and welcome to S 1 91.
I am, um,
On Thursday, March 5th, 2020, the Coronavirus
had established itself in the
United States. However, the MIT administration
considered its risk to the campus
community to be low, but just to be safe,
MIT prohibited all social gatherings
of 150 people or more.
That policy even applied
to campus preview weekend,
which would be converted
to a virtual format.
Course instruction, however,
would continue as normal.
On Tuesday, March 10th, 2020, the administration
took a significant new step in
response to the virus requiring all
students to evacuate campus within a week.
At the time there were 92
confirmed a presumptive covid,
19 cases in the state of Massachusetts.
On that day, thousands of students realized
that their MIT was gone and they had no
idea if it would come back.
80 years, 100,000 alumni,
trillions of dollars.
What started as an idea
to better the world?
Through technology has
become the gold standard.
Through the tireless work of generations
of extremely talented people,
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology
has grown from a patch of dirt into a
city on a river. And yet, with all
our talent and all our resources,
the Covid Pandemic brought this
institute to a halt already,
MIT has demonstrated remarkable resilience,
and it is clear that the institute will
survive,
But it will not survive.
Unchanged living groups and student clubs
do not have billion dollar endowments.
Which of them will survive?
And if they die, what
traditions will we lose?
What
Will take their place as students
return to their labs?
What research will we conduct
and who will fund it?
As we recover our balance and march on
with the progress, who is MIT going to be?